Configuring and Managing Kubernetes
Networking, Services, and Ingress
Course Overview
Course Overview
Hi everyone. My name's Anthony Nocentino, Enterprise Architect and Founder of
Centino Systems. Welcome to my course, Configuring and Managing Kubernetes
Networking, Services, and Ingress. Are you a systems administrator or developer
that needs to deploy workloads in Kubernetes clusters? If so, then this is the
course for you. In this course, we'll start our journey with an introduction
into Kubernetes networking fundamentals. We'll learn how Kubernetes cluster
networking works, both architecturally and dive deep into pod, node, and cluster
networking internals. And we'll also look at how cluster DNS works to provide
name resolution services in our Kubernetes clusters. Next, we'll look at how to
provide access to our cluster-based applications with services, looking closely at
each of the core service types available in Kubernetes, ClusterIP, NodePort, and
LoadBalancer, and how they build on each other to provide external access to
services. We'll also look at how we can use service discovery methods such as
DNS and environment variables to find services available in our cluster. And
finally, we'll look at how we can expose HTTP-based applications in our cluster to
external users with Ingress. We'll explore the architecture and several different
use cases, such as TLS encryption, path-based routing, and name-based virtual
hosts. By the end of this course, you'll have what it takes to implement and
manage Kubernetes networking, services, and Ingress. Before beginning this
course, you should be familiar with the Linux operating system and administering
it at the command line. You should have a firm understanding of TCP/IP-based
networking and also understand the fundamental concepts of containers. You will
need to know the core foundations of Kubernetes like what a cluster is and how
to interact with your cluster at the command line, and also application constructs
like deployments. I hope you'll join me on this journey to learn how to configure
and manage networking, services, and Ingress in your Kubernetes cluster, in the
course, Configuring and Managing Kubernetes Networking, Services, and Ingress,
here at Pluralsight.
Kubernetes Networking Fundamentals
Introduction, Course and Module Overview
Hello. This is Anthony Nocentino with Centino Systems. Welcome to my course,
Configuring and Managing Kubernetes Networking, Services, and Ingress. This
module is Kubernetes Networking Fundamentals. In this module, we will
introduce the Kubernetes networking model. We'll investigate a cluster network
topology, learn how pods communicate and wrap things up with a look at cluster
DNS. Let's kick this module off with our course overview. In the first module, we're
going to start our journey by looking at Kubernetes networking fundamentals
where we'll look at the Kubernetes networking model, a cluster network
topology, pod communication patterns, and cluster DNS. In the next module, we'll
look at how we can provide access to our Kubernetes based applications with
services in the module, Configuring and Managing Application Access with
Services. And then finally, we'll look closely at how we can use ingress to
provide external access to HTTP based applications inside of our cluster in
the module, Configuring and Managing Application Access with Ingress. In
this module, we'll begin with the Kubernetes networking model where we'll
discuss the need for a networking model, how it works, and the benefits that it
provides to simplify pod based applications and their configurations. Next, we'll
introduce how a cluster and pods all fit together on your network and dive deep
into an example cluster network topology. After that, we'll look at pod networking
internals learning how pods get access to network and how they can
communicate to each other. Then we'll introduce the container network interface,
or CNI, which is used to define and implement standardization in the
container networking space. And then finally, we'll dig into how Kubernetes
provides DNS services to the cluster with cluster DNS.
Introducing the Kubernetes Network Model and Cluster
Network Topology
Kubernetes defines a networking model that enables simplicity inside of
applications, and so let's dig into the elements of that now. This Kubernetes
networking model defines some rules that we have to live by when we build our
network topologies to support our Kubernetes infrastructure and
applications. And this first rule is that all Pods can communicate with all other
Pods running on all nodes. This essentially means that anywhere in the
cluster, regardless of the underlying Arc topology, all Pods need to be able to
reach each other and communicate over the network. The next rule is that agents
on a node can communicate with all Pods on that node, or more
precisely, software running on that node can communicate with the Pods that are
running on that node. And so things like the kubelet and kube-proxy are able
to contact the Pods that they need to orchestrate. The final requirement is that
there is no network address translation. Essentially, what we need to have
happened is that all Pods need to be able to have reachability to all other Pods
on any node using the Pod's real IP address. Why do we need these rules in the
Kubernetes networking model? Well, we want to be able to provide developers
simpler and consistent networking when deploying applications, hiding
implementation details, but still providing secure and robust networking that's
managed by administrators. We want developers to be able to define and
consume networking resources and code as part of their deployment
manifests. And having that requirement that Pods be able to talk to each other on
all nodes means that potentially clusters can span subnets, cloud fault domains,
or availability zones very, very easily. This all culminates in simpler service
discovery and application configurations. Services and Pods will be able to find
each other using their real IPs registered in DNS or as environment variables. Now,
with all that theory behind us, let's see this in action and check out a Kubernetes
cluster network topology. When you're deploying Kubernetes cluster, you're
going to see three different network names thrown around. And I'm not going to
lie, when I first got started with Kubernetes, I found this to be really challenging
and confusing, and so let's dig into this so you don't suffer that same fate. First
up, you're going to start off with the network and have some nodes in your cluster
attached to that network. This is the node network. This network is likely in your
data center or a virtual network in the cloud. Each node will have an IP address
assigned from this network, and the nodes will have reachability between each
other and other resources on your network. Next up is the Pod network. Each Pod
has a single IP address assigned to it on the Pod network. And depending on your
Pod network implementation, the IPs could be from the node network, but more
commonly, the IPs will be assigned from a dedicated pool of IPs called the Pod
CIDR range. In the cluster that we built together in the course, Kubernetes
Installation and Configuration Fundamentals, we chose to implement the Calico
Pod network using a Pod CIDR range of 192.168.0.0/16. Pods started in our cluster
will get IPs from that range. Next is the cluster network. The cluster network is
used by services using the cluster IP service type. IPs for services on this network
are allocated IP addresses from the range specified in the service cluster IP
range parameter that is part of your API server and controller manager
configurations. And so these are the three network types that you'll see in your
Kubernetes cluster, the Pod network, which is where Pods live, the node
network, which is the real network in your data center or cloud that your nodes
are on, and the cluster network, which is where cluster IP services are reached
on.
Pod Networking Communication Patterns and Internals
So that was our cluster network topology. Now let's dig a little deeper and learn
how Pods communicate over the network. When you have a multi-container
Pod, the containers in that Pod will share the same network namespace. They'll
share a single IP and port range for their applications to run on, and so for those
two containers in that single Pod to communicate to each other, they'll do that
over localhost. Now, communicating Pod to Pod within a node, Pods will use an
interface inside the Pod that's attached to a local software bridge or tunnel
interface to communicate to each other on their actual Pod IP addresses. The
interface names will vary depending upon the network model in use, so you'll see
eth0, veth0, and possibly others. Now for a Pod to talk to another Pod on another
node, Pods will communicate with each other on their real IP addresses, and so
the network between those nodes must be able to facilitate for that for Pods to
communicate on their real IPs, and this can be done either by Layer 2 or Layer 3
connectivity or an overlay network. An overlay network gives the appearance of a
single network between the nodes in a cluster, and uses tunnels or other
mechanisms to move encapsulated Pod network packets between the nodes. This
gives you independence from your underlying network infrastructure, but
enables your cluster to still adhere to the Kubernetes networking model. Our
Calico implementation of our Pod network in the lab cluster uses tunnels. The
final Pod communication pattern that we're going to look at today is access to
services. Services are implemented in kube-proxy, exposing services to both
users internal and external to the cluster, depending upon the service type. We
will dive into this in much more detail in the module, Configuring and Managing
Application Access with Services. Looking more closely at Pod networking
internals, containers in a Pod share a single network namespace, and just as
we introduced, applications running as containers in a Pod will also use localhost
to communicate to each other if needed, and they'll also share the same IP
address and source port ranges for applications. The network namespace in a
Pod is implemented by a special container called the pause or the infrastructure
container. When a Pod is created and started, this container starts up first and
sets up the network namespace for the Pod, and then application
containers, whether it's one or more, that are running inside of that Pod will share
this network namespace. This pause container enables application containers to
be restarted without interrupting the network namespace inside of the Pod, since
the network stack is initialized by the pause container rather than the application
container. The pause container has the lifecycle of the Pod, and so when the Pod
is deleted, this container will be deleted along with it.
Container Network Interface - CNI
Kubernetes is a container orchestrator and defines a network model. Now the
implementation of that network model is abstracted out of Kubernetes, and
Kubernetes uses the Container Network Interface, or the CNI, to implement
container and Pod networking in a cluster. The CNI defines a standard
specification for managing container networking and is used across multiple
container orchestration platforms. In Kubernetes, Kubernetes interfaces with the
CNI, and the CNI interfaces with your container runtime and the base
operating system to set up the networking for your containers and Pods, adding
or removing networking resources as needed. And so operations like setting up
namespaces, interfaces, bridge or tunnel configurations, and IP addressing are all
responsibilities of the CNI. In Kubernetes, CNI plugins are used to implement the
Kubernetes networking model. And in our lab cluster, we've configured the Calico
CNI plugin and implemented an overlay network based on IP tunnels. CNI plugins
like Calico and others are usually deployed as Pods controlled by daemon sets
running on each node in the cluster. And there are many other CNI plugins
available. Which plugin should you use for your production cluster? Well, each
CNI plugin provides different capabilities and value to your network such as
management, network policies like QoS, encryption, traffic segmentation, and so
on, and so you're going to have to decide on which CNI plugin to use based on
your requirements and its capabilities. On nodes, the kubelet controls the local
network configuration and its configuration defines a network plugin. And this
can be either CNI or Kubenet. When the kubelet is configured for CNI, it will load
the CNI plugin and its configuration. And in our lab, that's Calico, which uses
tunnel interfaces to implement that Pod network. If it's set for kubelet, the node's
going to be configured with routes and bridges inside the BaseOS, rather than
tunnels to implement a Pod network. In our upcoming demo, we're going to look
at both network solutions, examining our on-prem cluster, which uses the Calico
CNI plugin, and then we'll look at an Azure Kubernetes Service cluster that uses
kubenet as the network plugin. Check out this link here for a further discussion
on which CNI plugins are available for your Kubernetes Pod network.
Lab Environment Review
Before we kick off our first demonstration in this course, let's review the lab
environment. We initially constructed this lab in the course, Kubernetes
Installation and Configuration Fundamentals. Now our virtual machines are going
to be the same. They're going to be Ubuntu 22.04, VMware Fusion VMs with 2
vCPUs, 2 GB of RAM, and 100 GB of disk space with the swap disabled, as
required by the kubelet. For this lab, you can use any underlying hypervisor that
you want. I just so happen to be using VMware Fusion. Now, to take DNS out of
the equation in our lab, I have hostnames set for each server and specified in a
host file on each of the virtual machines in the lab. As for the virtual machines
that make up the lab, we're going to have one control plane node, c1-cp1, where
we'll be driving all of our demonstrations from. We'll SSH into c1-cp1 and use
kubectl locally on that server. In addition to the control plane node, we're going
to have three nodes in our lab, c1-node1, c1-node2, and c1-node3, and they're all
going to be statically IP addressed with the addresses shown here on the
screen. Now if you need help constructing this lab, head over to my course,
Kubernetes Installation and Configuration Fundamentals, and you'll get
bootstrapped with this configuration. I also want to call out that c1-cp1 used to be
called c1-master1 in this series of courses. We have since renamed it to c1-cp1
to keep up with current terminology in Kubernetes. So if you see c1-master1 in a
demo, know that it's functionally the same as c1-cp1.
Demo: Investigating Kubernetes Networking - CNI
Network Overview
Let's dive into our first demo and investigate some Kubernetes networking. We're
going to look at two key scenarios today, our local lab cluster, which uses the
Calico CNI plugin, and an Azure Kubernetes Service cluster, where we're going to
look at the network configuration using the kubenet network plugin. Alright, so
let's get started with our first demo of investigating Kubernetes networking. And
we're going to start off by opening an SSH connection into c1-master1 and look at
the network configuration from that node. And the first thing that we're going to
do is look at the CNI plugin and how it operates and brings together all the nodes
in the cluster to provide a Pod network, and so let's go ahead and walk through
that process now. So jumping down to line 10, I have kubectl get nodes -o
wide, and what that's going to do is give me a listing of all the nodes and their
internal IPs. And so there we can see the IP addresses of each individual node,
so c1-master1 has an IP of 172.16.94.10, and then .11, .12, and .13 for the remaining
nodes in our cluster. So with that we have what's called the node network, and
that's the real IPs that are in our data center that these nodes run on. And so let's
start up a basic deployment inside of our cluster, and this deployment has three
replicas, and that'll place one Pod on each node in our cluster. In addition to the
deployment, we're going to front end that with a service. Now let's move forward
and look at the network information for those Pods. If I do a kubectl get pods -o
wide, I'm going to see all of the IPs that are allocated to the Pods that are up and
running. And so there we see the Pod name on the left, our hello-world Pods, and
the IP information here on the right, 192.168.222.211, .131.29, and .206.98. Each of
the Pods has an individual IP address on the Pod network. Now, way back when
we built our cluster together in the course, Kubernetes Installation and
Configuration Fundamentals, we specified that we wanted the PodCIDR network
to be 192.168.0.0/16, and so these IP addresses are going to be allocated from
that address space. The IP address allocation is controlled in this scenario by the
Calico plugin. It's in charge of allocating the IPs from that PodCIDR range. Next,
let's look at the IP configuration inside of a Pod, and so let's grab a Pod name and
store that in an environment variable. And once we have that Pod name, let's
open up a shell to that Pod and look at the IP configuration inside of the Pod. If
we do an ip addr inside of the Pod, inside of that Pod I see one Ethernet
interface. And so at the bottom there we see 192.168.222.211, so that's the real Pod
IP inside of the Pod. And so this individual pod will be able to reach all of the
other pods on the network using its real address without any network address
translation. Now, moving forward in the demo, so that's inside of the Pod, let's go
ahead and exit outside of that Pod and look at some more network information
available for the individual nodes in our cluster. And so I'm going to use my
favorite command, kubectl describe, and I'm going to describe an individual
node, c1-master1, and then pipe that into more. We're going to walk through some
of the network information that's part of this output. And so the first thing I want
to call out is in the annotations we have two. We have projectcalico.org/
IPv4Address: 172.16.94.10/24. That's the real IP address of this node. Then we have
a second annotation, projectcalico.org/IPv4IPIPTunnelAddr: 192.168.19.64. That's
the IP address of the tunnel interface that's associated with this node. And so the
Calico network is going to use tunnels to exchange information between the
nodes in the cluster so that the Pods running on the nodes in that cluster can use
the real IPs independent of the underlying infrastructure. Pod traffic will go into
the tunnel on one node and pop out of the tunnel on the destination node where
that other Pod is living on that the Pod is trying to communicate to. So,
moving forward in the output here, if we go down a little bit further, there we see
the actual network address information associated with this node. So we were
looking at annotations a second ago, this is the address information associated
with the node API object for this particular node. So we see Addresses: InternalIP:
172.16.94.10. We also see the Hostname c1-master1. Now moving further, we have
additional network information available inside the node. There we have
PodCIDR, and then PodCIDRs, plural. Now, normally what PodCIDR is, is the range
of IPs that are going to be assigned to Pods that are started on this
node. Well, that's not quite the case inside of the Calico Pod network, and
we'll look at that in a second, and we'll see that the Pod's IPs are going to be
allocated from that global class B pool. Now we're going to compare this with
kubenet, which does use these ranges for allocating IPs from. Now you might be
wondering why there are two ranges here, PodCIDR and PodCIDRs plural. Well, if
it's PodCIDR, you're going to be using a single IPv4 or IPv6 range to allocate from,
and that's going to be indicated in the PodCIDR field. And if we look at PodCIDRs
plural, if you're using IPv4 and IPv6, then those would be the ranges that will be
allocated from, so you have one of each stored in that PodCIDRs plural object
field. Alright, so let's go ahead and break out of this output here.
Demo: Investigating Kubernetes Networking - CNI
Overlay Network Routing
And move forward and look at some more network information about what's kind
of going on inside of this Calico network. So if I do a kubectl get pods -o wide to
look at the IPs associated with the individual Pods, like how can we figure out
how traffic goes from c1-master1 maybe over to c1-node1 for a Pod running on
that node? And the way that it does that is with routes. And let's look at the
routing information on c1-master1. And with that output there, we can see we
have several routes defined. Now, I want to focus on those last three routes in the
routing table. So there we see 192.168.131.0 with a gateway of c1-node2. So any
traffic destined for that network is going to get sent to c1-node2's IP address. How
is it going to get there? Via the tunnel interface over here on the right, that's the
target or destination interface that packets will go down if they need to reach
that particular subnet. We can also see, here, that there's routes defined for the
other networks running on each node in our cluster. And so with these
routes, that's how this individual node is able to determine where to send this
information. So if traffic is generated on c1-master1 and it needs to get to a Pod
on c1-node1, it's going to go into the tunnel interface based on this defined
route. Let's go to move forward and look at that individual tunnel interface. If I do
an ip addr, there we see tunl0, or tunnel, has an interface of type ip and ip. It's got
an IP address of 192.168.19.64. So this is a real interface on this server that's going
to receive the traffic. It's then going to receive that traffic and send it into
a process that's going to encapsulate it and send it on to the target node that's
defined. And so let's look at this from the other perspective, let's say we have to
communicate to c1-node1. So let's open up an SSH session into c1-node1. On this
side, let's look at the IP addresses that are available. If I do an ip addr on c1-
node1, there we see I have a tunnel interface on this system as well. So there we
see 192.168.222.192. So this is the other side of the tunnel. Traffic is going to come
in on the real interface of the node, which is, if we scroll up, we'll see is 172.16.94.11
and then get de-encapsulated and passed on into the Pod. And let's go see how
that happens. And so in the route information here, we have the routes for the
Pod networks that are running on each node. So there we see a different
perspective because now we're on c1-node1. We have a route back to master1
and then also nodes 2 and 3. We also have two additional routes on the bottom
there. Where do those routes come from? Well those routes are for Pods that are
running on this individual node. And so as traffic comes in on that tunnel
interface, it's going to get de-encapsulated, it's going to find the route for the
Pod that it needs to get to, then get passed on into that individual Pod. So let's
go ahead and log out of c1-node1 and get a shell back into c1-master1. So a quick
recap. Pod traffic moving between nodes is passed via tunnels, and this traffic
goes into tunnel interfaces based on routes defined on the nodes. Once that
traffic has reached a destination node for the Pod that it's trying to reach, then
there's going to be a route on that node that defines an interface that's exposed
into the Pod.
Demo: Investigating Kubernetes Networking - Kubenet
Network Overview
So let's move forward into our next demo and look at an Azure Kubernetes service
network using the kubenet network plugin. Now in comparison, we want to look
at what we did with Calico. Calico uses routes and tunnels. Well, kubenet is
implemented slightly different where it's going to use bridges and routes in the
underlying infrastructure and let's walk through how this all works inside of
Kubenet in our AKS cluster. The first thing that we're going to do is switch our
context into Kate's cloud. The cluster that we're switching to is the cluster that
we built together inside of AKS in the course, Kubernetes Installation and
Configuration Fundamentals. Now this demo isn't specific to AKS, this could also
be run in GKE and any other clusters that are using the Kubenet network plugin.
So the first thing that we're going to do after switching our context is to stand up
a simple deployment again, and in this scenario, we're going to start a collection
of pods inside of our AKS cluster creating three replicas using our hello world
container. Then next, we're going to check out the node configuration. We'll do
a kubectl get nodes -o wide and then look at the network information for
the nodes that we have up and running in our cluster. This is a 3-node cluster so
on the left there, we see the node name so we see ending in 000, 001, and
002. We also have the IP information associated with the individual nodes. So
there we see 10.240.0.4, .5, and .6. These are the real IP addresses associated with
these nodes in our Azure virtual network and Azure Kubernetes Service Cluster is
just a collection of virtual machines behind the scenes, so underneath this AKS
cluster is really three virtual machines that are up and running having a
traditional networking configuration and there we can see that with the internal
IPs. So let's use kubectl describe nodes to look a little closer at the network
configuration of the individual nodes as it is tracked by the API server for these
individual node objects. So we don't have any annotations associated with the
networking configuration, so there we just see the standard
annotations associated with an AKS node inside of Azure. If we go down a little bit
further, we'll have that networking configuration for the nodes. So there we see
addresses and in the host name ending in 000 and then the real IP of the node
itself, 10.240.0.4. Now I want to move down a little bit further and call out that the
PodCIDR ranges are going to function a little bit different than they did in
the Calico configuration. In the Calico configuration, the IP addresses
are allocated across the entire Class B space, regardless of which node a pod was
running on. In this implementation in Kubenet, that PodCIDR range is going to be
used to allocate IPs to the pod started on the individual node. So pods started on
this node here will get allocated from that address space 10.244.0.0/24. If we
move forward and look at another node, so I'm going to go down, here we see its
a node ending in 001, if we look at the PodCIDR range for this individual
node, we'll see that it's going to be, go down a little bit further, there we see the
PodCIDR range for this node 10.244.2.0/24. So pods started on this node will
come from that range and this pattern applies to all of the nodes in this network
model using Kubenet. So now on that last node in 002, let's go and check out its
PodCIDR range. There, we see 10.244.1.0/24. So let's go ahead and break out of
here and check. We stood up a basic workload running three pods. Let's go
ahead and run kubectl get pods -o wide. There are the three pods that are up
and running, and the IP address is going to be allocated from the PodCIDR
ranges on the individual nodes. So there we see in that first pod, it's running on
the node ending in 001, it's PodCIDR range was 10.244.2.0/24, and that individual
pod's IP is 10.244.2.171 and that pattern is across the remaining nodes.
Demo: Investigating Kubernetes Networking - Accessing
an AKS Node with SSH
So let's clear our console and start out fresh and move forward into our next
demo and give privileged terminal access to an AKS cluster node via SSH, and I
have a link here on line 99 that describes that process in detail. But in short, the
technique involved starting a Pod on a node in the cluster and giving access to
that Pod as root. And that's what we're going to do here on lines 100 and 101. So
first, what we're going to do is get a node name and store that in an environment
variable NODENAME. And then on line 101, we're going to use kubectl debug to
start a privileged container on the node that we want to get SSH access to, and
so let's walk through that code together. Kubectl debug node/ and then the node
named variable, which we retrieved on line 100. We'll then specify the -it
parameter for an interactive terminal to the container that we're starting on that
node. Then we'll specify the image that we want to start, and so this is a Microsoft
container that's published in the Microsoft Container Registry, which is a base-
ubuntu with a tag v0.0.11. This tag might change versions, so check the
documentation if this image no longer works or is not available. And so we'll run
that code together on line 101. And what this will do is will start a Pod, which will
start a container with privileged access to the node that we want to have access
to. And so here at the bottom, I have a terminal session open to the node ending
in 000 as root. And so this is how you can get privileged terminal access to an
AKS node in your cluster.
Demo: Investigating Kubernetes Networking - Kubenet
Network Routing and Bridging
Moving forward in our demo, now that we have privileged access to a node, let's
look at its networking configuration in detail. If I ask this node for its routes, I have
a smaller set of routes available to me now than when compared to the Calico
network, because we're using routes and bridges rather than routes to tunnel
interfaces. And so the first line there we see the default route for the regular
interface, and then that second line we see 10.240.0.0. That's the node
network, so that's the local virtual network that these virtual machines are
actually attached to. Next, we see 10.244.0.0/24 to cbr0. Let's kind of unpack that
a little bit. So we logged into the node ending in 000. Its PodCDR range was
10.244.0.0/24, so there we see the route for that information sending traffic to an
interface cbr0, which is the local bridge. And so as traffic comes into this node
and it's destined for a Pod running on this node, it's going to hit that route and
get passed onto that bridge, which is where the Pod is going to be attached to, or
the individual containers running on this node. Now, what we don't see here is
routes to the other PodCIDR ranges on the nodes in our cluster, so we don't see
10.244.1.0 or 10.244.2.0. Where's that routing information? Well, that routing
information is going to be defined on the virtual network in our cloud, and so in
our case, inside of Azure, that's going to be a route table that's associated with
this particular virtual network that these individual nodes live on. And so I have a
link here that's going to show us that information, so let's go ahead and switch
over to that screen. Now, inside of this route table configuration if I scroll down a
little bit, we'll see information describing the routing infrastructure into the virtual
network. And so for traffic to move between the nodes to get to the individual
Pod networks, we have to have these routes defined, and so there we can see a
collection of routes for each individual PodCIDR range on the individual
nodes. Now, with that first route there with the node name ending in 000, we see
the address prefix of 10.244.0.0/24. That's the PodCIDR range hosted on that
node. We see the next hop address of 10.240.0.4. That's the real IP address of that
node on the node network. And so as traffic leaves a node destined for a Pod IP
on this prefix, that traffic will find this route on the virtual network and be sent to
the correct node hosting that PodCIDR range, and in this case that's going to be
the node ending in 000. And we also see routes for each other node in our
cluster. Now, since this is an AKS cluster, Azure is going to handle this
configuration for us. As we add and remove nodes to our cluster, we're going to
get routes for each of the node's PodCIDR ranges with the next hop addresses
pointing to the node's real IP on the node network. So let's swing back over to our
terminal and look at some more information inside the nodes, so we still have an
SSH connection open on this individual node. If I do an ip addr and I scroll up a
little bit in this output here, I want to call out two specific interfaces. So there we
see eth0, which is the Ethernet interface of the virtual machine 10.240.0.4, right,
it's got an IP address on the node network. Then we also have cbr0, which is the
bridge that's running on this node that the pods are attached to, 10.240.0.1, so it's
got a real IP address on the Pod network. If we go ahead and bring a shell back
up and bring some more code into view, I'm going to install the bridge-utils
package so I can use this brctl show command. And what that's going to do is
show me the interfaces that are attached to that software bridge that's running
on my node. And so with this output of this bridge information here, we see that
there are four virtual Ethernet interfaces. There are four Pods that are currently
running on this node, and each of those Pods has an eth0 interface inside of that
Pod that's paired with an individual virtual Ethernet interface that's attached to
this bridge outside of the Pod. And so that's how Pods are able to attach to the
network. Pods will send their packets to the IP address of the bridge, and
then that will route them onto the node network with those defined routes
that we saw inside of our Azure virtual network. And so let's see how that
works. So let's exit out of here and get on to c1-master1 again. Alright, so there we
have our SSH connection open to c1-master1. So now what we're going to do is
grab PODNAME from our deployment, and then we're going to look at the IP
stack information of that individual Pod, so kubectl exec -it, using the PODNAME
variable I want to execute the ip addr command. So this is going to be the IP
address of that individual Pod, so there we see 10.244.2.171. So that's being
allocated from the PodCIDR range on the node that this individual Pod is running
on. Now the next thing I want to do is ask for the routing information from that
same Pod. If I look at the route information inside the Pod, I have only two routes. I
have a default route which sends all information out to 10.244.2.1. That IP is going
to be the IP address of the bridge cbr0 inside of that node, and so when traffic
wants to leave our Pod, it's going to hit this default route and then get forwarded
to the interface cbr0, which will then forward it on to the node network, and then
the node network will route the traffic based on the destination address in the
packet, and if it's a Pod, it will use a defined route in the virtual network to find
the correct node to be routed to. And so with this network configuration here, this
is how you can see that all pods are able to communicate to each other with
their real IPs on the Pod network. So that's a wrap for this demo. Let's go ahead
and delete the deployments we created in this demonstration. We'll delete the
deployment in the AKS cluster, and then switch context and delete the
deployment in our on-prem cluster.
Cluster DNS and Custom DNS Server and DNS Client
Configurations
So now that we know how packets move around a Kubernetes cluster, the next
element of Kubernetes networking fundamentals that we're going to cover today
is cluster DNS. Kubernetes provides DNS as a cluster service. The default
configuration has a deployment running two Pods providing load balancing and
robustness for that DNS service. The DNS server used is CoreDNS. Now by
default, Pods deployed in your cluster are configured to use this internal cluster
DNS service. In a DNS server, DNS records are created for resources deployed in
your cluster. Services will get DNS A records and quad A records based on if
they're IPv4 or IPv6. And namespaces will get DNS subdomains created for
them. In this module, we're going to focus on the DNS service and how it works
and how it's configured. In the next module, we're going to look closely at the
types of DNS records created inside the DNS server for different service
types. The DNS service is core to service discovery inside of Kubernetes. As
resources and services are created, Pods in a cluster can reference resources in a
cluster by their DNS names. Now from a configuration standpoint, we can
customize the configuration of the DNS service, and a common customization is
configuring specific DNS forwarders for DNS zones that aren't hosted in the
cluster DNS service locally. And we can also customize the DNS client
configuration in our Pods. Perhaps you want to override cluster DNS and point to
a specific DNS server or provide a custom DNS suffix search list in our
configurations, and let's look at some code examples for both of these. With
cluster DNS, one of the core operations that you might need to do is to control
where the DNS service is forwarding to. So perhaps you need to send DNS
requests to another internal DNS service in your environment, and let's walk
through how to do that now. The configuration for CoreDNS is stored as a
ConfigMap named coredns in the kube-system namespace. Accessing this
ConfigMap will give you this configuration information here. This ConfigMap is
mapped as a volume into the Pod's file system at /etc/coredns with the file
named Corefile. Now by default, the cluster DNS service will forward to DNS
servers to find on the local node at etc/resolv.conf, and so here we see the code
forward and then a dot for all DNS zones to /etc/resolv.conf. If you want to
change our configuration to point to a specific forwarder, we can change that line
to point to an IP address, and so here you can see we're changing that to
1.1.1.1. Now DNS configuration is a much deeper topic that I'm showing right
here. To dig into more complex DNS configurations for CoreDNS, check out this
link here. But I do want to call out that regardless of the change that want to
make to our CoreDNS configuration for our cluster DNS service, those changes
are going to be implemented inside of this ConfigMap. So, now that we've
covered how to configure the CoreDNS server inside of our cluster DNS
service, now let's talk about how we can configure DNS client configurations
inside of a Pod. Now, inside of a Pod spec here we have the standard Pod
definition. To control the DNS configuration of a Pod, we have two key elements
to work with, DNS policy and DNS config. DNS policy defines how a Pod's DNS
client configuration acts, and our options here are default, cluster first, cluster
first with host net, and none. To define a Pod-specific DNS configuration and
ignore the DNS configuration coming from the cluster, we'll want to set the
dnsPolicy to None. The default setting is cluster first, which forwards DNS queries
for the cluster domain suffix, which is cluster.local by default, to the cluster DNS
service. And we'll use the node's DNS servers for all other domain queries. Another
option here is default, which tells Pods to inherit the name resolution
configuration directly from the node that it's running on. Default is actually not
the default setting. The default setting is cluster first, and so if we don't define
anything, that's the functionality that we'll have. Now with the dnsPolicy set to
None, that enables us to be able to define a DNS configuration in the dnsConfig
part of our Pods spec, and then we can go into the DNS specific configuration
details defining things like nameservers and also search suffixes.
Demo: Investigating Cluster DNS
Let's get into a demo where we're going to look at investigating the cluster DNS
service where we'll look at how it's deployed and how it's configured. Then we'll
configure CoreDNS to use custom DNS forwarders by adding the config map
used for the CoreDNS server configuration. Next, we'll look at pod DNS
configuration and deploy a pod with a DNS server outside of the cluster. And
then finally, we'll look at the DNS records automatically created for pods and
services. Let's get started. So here we are with an SSH connection open to c1-
master1 and let's start off our demo by investigating the cluster DNS service. And
so on Line 7 here, I have kubectl get service --namespace from kube-system and
that's going to give us a listing of all of the services that are available in kube-
system and there is only one, the one that were interested in, the service for
kube-dns. It's service type is cluster IP and it has an assigned cluster IP
of 10.96.0.10. It's a multiport service so here in the Port section, we can see it's
running on Port 53 on both the UDP and TCP protocols. It also has an additional
port 9153 running on TCP. So let's go ahead and move forward in our demo and
use the command kubectl describe deployment to look closely at our CoreDNS
deployment and that's going to be the controller that manages the deployment
of our CoreDNS pods in our cluster. And so to do that, we can use kubectl
describe deployment coredns from the namespace kube-system and I'm going to
pipe that output into more. And so once we have that output at the bottom
here, let's kind of go through some of the important information that's available in
this output. And so there we see name is coredns and then the namespace kube-
system. Going in a little bit further, we see replicas that 2 are desired and that 2
are currently available. And so with this default configuration, we're going to get
two pods up and running supporting our CoreDNS service. Going down a little bit
further in the output inside of the pod template here in the Container section, we
can see some arguments are defined and so they receive -conf pointing to etc/
coredns/Corefile and that's the configuration file that will configure our CoreDNS
service and let's look a little more closely at where that file comes from
exactly. And so here, in the Mount section, we can see that there is a mount
at etc/coredns and that's coming from a volume named config-volume. Inside of
the Volume section, we see config-volume. That volume is of type ConfigMap and
its name is CoreDNS, and inside of that ConfigMap, and we saw this in
the presentation portion of the course, the Data section is named CoreFile. So
going back up, that's where we get the configuration file for our CoreDNS service
from the volume etc/coredns, and from the ConfigMap in that Data section
named CoreFile. Alright, so let's go ahead and break out of here and take a peek
at that Configmap. So on Line 15, we can do kubectl get configmaps from the
namespace kube system, the name of the ConfigMap is CoreDNS and I'm going
to output that the YAML. And so inside of here, we see apiVersion v1 data
CoreFile and so that's where that file name comes from. Now inside of the data
section for that CoreFile is the CoreDNS configuration and this is the
default configuration for our CoreDNS server. Inside of there, we can see that the
Forward section is going to forward all domains and use the forwarders defined in
the local etc resolve.conf on the node that the pod is going to be deployed on. So
let's go ahead and break out of this output here and look at how we can
customize our CoreDNS configuration.
Demo: Configuring CoreDNS to Use Custom Forwarders
and Custom Pod DNS Configuration
Alright, so let's go ahead and bring some new code into view. And so what we're
going to do here is configure CoreDNS to use custom forwarders, and we're going
to use two different types. We're going to forward to a specific upstream
forwarder, and we're also going to configure what's called a conditional domain
forwarder. And so let's go ahead and look at the YAML
file, CoreDNSConfigCustom.yaml. Now inside the YAML file, we'll see the
definition for our ConfigMap so there we see API version v1, kind ConfigMap, and
the name is CoreDNS. And inside of the Data section, there we see Corefile.
Corefile is the file that's going to be exposed as a mount inside of the pod at etc/
CoreDNS. Now on Line 8, there we see the start of a server block. Inside of that
server block is the core configuration for our CoreDNS server. Going out a little
bit further, we can see on Line 18, I'm defining a forwarder. And so for all DNS
domains that aren't hosted locally on this DNS server, those requests be
forwarded onto 1.1.1.1. A little bit further down, now we're adding what's called a
conditional forwarder and so we have an additional server block to help us
with that, and so there you see centinosystems.com. And so for any requests of
that domain, those DNS requests will be forwarded to the forwarder 9.9.9.9. So
let's go ahead and jump back over to our driver script here and push
that configuration out and we can do that with kubectl apply -
f CoreDNSConfigCustom.yaml in the namespace kube-system. Let's go ahead
and run that file there, and at the bottom. we can see ConfigMap CoreDNS
configured. Now that's going to update the config map right away. What that
doesn't do is update the configuration file in the pod right away. It takes a second
for that volume based ConfigMap exposed as file to refresh that file. And so, I'm
going to show you a technique on how you can figure out when your DNS
configuration gets refreshed. We can use kubectl logs --namespace kube-system
with a selector for k8s-app=kube-dns --follow and what that's going to do is follow
the application logs in both of the pods that are up and running. Now after a
minute or two, what we'll do is we'll get a log entry in this file showing us that the
configuration has been reloaded, meaning that the file inside of the pod has been
updated. CoreDNS sends that update and reloaded the DNS server, and there at
the bottom, we can see log entries for each pod now that its configuration has
been updated and we see that reloading is complete. So let's go to Ctrl+C to
break out of that log follow and move forward in our demo. So now that we made
a configuration change, the next thing that we want to do is to make sure that
our DNS service still works. Now if we did something wrong in our configuration,
we would've saw it in our kubectl logs that we were just looking at, but I want
to make sure that we still have DNS resolution. And so, let's go ahead and grab
our service IP for our kube-dns service and use nslookup to do some domain
queries. So let's go ahead and do a query for www.pluralsight.com on the
specific service IP. There we can see the address that we're requesting against
is 10.96.0.10 and we got some DNS information back. Let's do another query for
www.centinosystems.com against our DNS cluster service IP, and there we can
see against the server 10.96.0.10 and we got an answer back, and so we know our
DNS configuration is up and running. Now the next thing that I want to do before
we move along into the next portion of the demo is to put our DNS configuration
back. And so, inside of CoreDNSConfigDefault.yaml, what I'm doing is putting
everything back to default and we're going to use. On Line 17 there, you can see
we're going back to etc/resolve.conf. I just want to make sure that our cluster
goes back to its normal configuration before we move on into the next set of
demos. Let's go ahead and push that ConfigMap update out and there we
see configmap/coredns configured, and so that still will follow that same
process, it'll take a minute for the ConfigMap to update the file that's exposed
into the pod, and then we'll see our DNS configuration restart as it senses that
there was a new file updated inside of the pod. And now for the next demo, what
we're going to work on is configuring a pod's DNS client information. And so, let's
look at DeploymentCustomDns.yaml. Inside of here, we have a basic deployment
that starts up a couple replicas, and we're going to drill down into the
pod template spec, and instead of there, you can see we have a DNS
policy defined. The DNS policy is set to none. Inside of that, we have on Line 21 a
DNS configuration where we're defining a specific name server, in this case,
9.9.9.9. So let's jump back over to our driver script here and we'll push that out, so
we'll do a kubectl apply -f DeploymentCustomDns.yaml, and there at the bottom,
we can see our deployment has been created. And so, I want to verify that that
actually has taken effect inside of the pod and what we'll do is we'll grab one of
the pod names using kubectl get pods with that selector query there, throw that
in an environment variable, let's double-check to make sure that we have one, so
we'll do echo $PODNAME, and there we can see one of the pods that we have.
And so to verify the DNS configuration, I want to read the configuration of etc/
resolve.conf inside of the pod and you can do that with kubectl exec -it passing
in the environment variable for the PODNAME --cat, which is the program that we
want to execute and giving it the parameter etc/resolve.conf, and what we're
going to get is the contents of that file written to standard out and there we can
see name server inside of the pod is set to 9.9.9.9 overriding the default
configuration, which is cluster first. Moving forward, let's go ahead and clean up
from this demonstration and do a kubectl delete -f DeploymentCustomDns.yaml
and that's going to delete our deployment and delete the service and get us
back to a good starting point in our cluster.
Demo: Examining Cluster DNS Records for Pods and
Services
Moving forward into our next demo, let's look at the DNS records created for both
pods and services. We're going to start off by creating the deployment, we're
going to do that here on Line 64 with the manifest Deployment.yaml. Inside that
manifest, there is a deployment that creates three replicas of our Hello World
app. Additionally, also in that deployment manifest is a service Hello World. So
let's check out the pods created by that deployment. Here, we can see that three
pods are up, running, and ready in our cluster. And so with that, let's check out
the DNS configuration associated with those pods in our cluster. We'll go ahead
and grab our service IP for our DNS service once more and put that in an
environment variable SERVICEIP. And so for each pod in the cluster, it's going to
get an A record and it's going to get an A record in the format of a dashed
representation of its IP address, and so here on Line 77, we see 192-168-206 -XX
and so I have that as a placeholder for one of the pod IPs. So in the listing below
we can see the first pod has a pod IP of 192.168.206.124. So let's go ahead and
type that in right here on Line 77, and so this is going to be the format of the A
record created for each pod in the cluster so each pod will have its pod IP on the
front end here, then it's going to be followed by the namespaces that they
received .default for the namespace, the type of resource .pod, and then our
domain name for our cluster is cluster.local, and so this is representative of the
entire A record of this particular pod
192-168-204-124.default.pod.cluster.local. And so we're going to use a tool called
nslookup to ask our DNS service what the IP address of this particular pod is. So
every pod will have an A record associated with it and so we could do this for
each of the pods in the cluster if we needed to. So let's go ahead and run that
code on Line 77 to get the address associated with that DNS A record. And so in
the output below, we can see the DNS server is at 10.96.0.10, that's the service IP
for our DNS server. We ask that DNS service to give us the data associated with
that A record, and so we see that at the bottom here, and so in the output, we see
the name and there is the whole A record again, and then the data associated
with that, the address 192.168.206.124. So let's go ahead and move forward to the
next part of this demo, we're going to do the same thing, but for services this
time. And let's go ahead and get a listing of the services in our cluster. We can do
kubectl get service and we see there is two services up and running hello-world
and the Kubernetes service. And so we can use nslookup again to get the
address information associated with that A record. Now the format of that A
record is going to be like this. We see hello-world, that's the name of the
service. Again, we're in the default namespace so we see .default, and then .svc
since this is a service, and then our cluster domain is cluster.local. And so we can
use this to get the address of this particular service for service discovery in our
applications and so let's go ahead and use nslookup to see the IP address
associated with this service. On Line 83, I have nslookup with the FQDN for the
Hello World service, and then again, we're going to use the service IP
environment variable for our cluster DNS service. When I run that code at the
bottom, we can see that A record again so the name is hello-
world.default.svc.cluster.local and then the IP address associated with
that service, 10.105.93.207. And so we can use this method to discover the IP
addresses of services in our cluster. In our kubectl get service listing above, we
can see that for the service, hello-world, that the cluster IP address is indeed
10.105.93.207. And so let's go ahead and move forward and wrap this demo up
with kubectl delete -f to delete the resources that we had created in this demo.
Demo: Additional Cluster DNS Demos
Now at the bottom of the demo code here, I have some additional code for
you, the viewer. In a demo above, when we deployed custom DNS forwarders
together, I deployed the configuration and ransom sample DNS queries to see if
our DNS servers were still up and running. But what you didn't see is if those DNS
queries were hitting the right forwarding servers, and I've confirmed that with the
technique below. And so the code here uses tcpdump on a node that's running
one of the core DNS Pods. And in that packet capture, you'll be able to see the
DNS traffic leaving the network and being sent on to the correct forwarders
based on the query. I'm giving you this code here so that you can complete the
verification process if you like. And I also have some sample packet capture
information for you to review and compare with your results.
Module Review and What's Next!
So here we are at the end of our module, and we certainly covered a lot. We
looked at the Kubernetes networking model and why it's needed. We next looked
at an example cluster network topology and learned all the different network
types in our cluster, the Pod network, cluster network, and node network. We then
learned the networking internals inside of a Pod and also how the Container
Network Interface, or CNI, brings value to Kubernetes by giving you
pluggable network solutions based on your requirements. And I've wrapped
things up with a tour of the cluster DNS service. So here we are at the end of this
module. Join me in the next module, Configuring and Managing Application
Access with Services.
Configuring and Managing Application Access
with Services
Introduction, Course and Module Overview
Hello, this is Anthony Nocentino with Centino Systems. Welcome to my course,
Configuring and Managing Kubernetes Networking, Services, and Ingress. This
module is configuring and managing application access with services. In this
module, we will learn how to configure access to applications in our cluster using
services. We'll explore the different types of services and their use cases. We'll
dive deep into service networking internals and close out the module with how
we can use various methods to discover services available in our cluster. We
started the course off with networking fundamentals, now let's move forward and
learn how we can use services to access our cluster-based applications. In this
module, we will begin with understanding services, where we'll discuss the need
for services and how they work to provide persistent access to Pod-based
applications. Next, we'll look at the types of services that are available
in Kubernetes and the various use cases for them. After that, we'll look at service
networking internals, learning how services are implemented inside of our cluster
at the network level. And then finally, we'll dig into service discovery and how
services can be found by using DNS names or environment variables.
Understanding Services in Kubernetes
Services in Kubernetes provide persistent access endpoints for clients, and the
reason that this is needed is it adds persistency to the ephemerality of pods. As
pods come and go during scaling or controller operations, the number of pods or
their network configurations can change and services provide a networking
abstraction with the persistent virtual IP address and DNS name so you point
your users or your applications to this service IP or DNS name for access to the
services provided by your underlying pods, and then the service will load balance
that incoming traffic to the underlying backend pods. And as pods come and go
due to those controller operations, services are automatically updated to reflect
those changes and the load balancing configuration is updated to match.
Services use labels and selectors to determine which pods are a member of
which service in a cluster. A controller will monitor which pods satisfy the
selector, and for each pod that matches the selector, an endpoint object is
created consisting of the pod IP and the target application port. Each matching
endpoint is added to a list of endpoints supporting the services and then this list
is used to load balance traffic across all the pods supporting that service. The
implementation of services is the responsibility of the kube-proxy. The kube-
proxy exposes the services onto the network. The default and most commonly
configured way this is implemented is with IP tables. Other options include IPVS
and user space proxy mode. Kube-proxy runs as a pod controlled by a
DaemonSet, and so you'll have a kube-proxy pod running on each node in your
cluster. As services and their endpoints come and go, kube-proxy watches the
API Server and the endpoint objects available and will update the local
configuration to match the desired state, and in the default configuration, this
means setting IP tables rules to support the service configurations that are
needed for the pods running on that node. For more information on the labels
and selectors elements of services and how that all pieces together, be sure to
watch my course, Managing the Kubernetes API Server and Pods. In this module,
we're going to focus on the types of services, how they work, and also service
network internals. Let's take a look at services in action. So let's say in our
cluster, we create a deployment that creates four pods and we frontend that
with the service, and in this case, the service is going to be TCP port 80, better
known as HTTP. Our cluster is going to allocate a persistent IP address and DNS
name for this service and that's where we're going to point users to at this IP
address. The IP address being allocated for the service depends on the service
type and that's the focus of the next part of the module when we discuss service
types. In the services configuration, we're going to define a label selector. In this
case, let's say our label selector is the letter A. Now in our deployment in the pod
template spec, we're going to define a label for each pod created that matches
the label selector in the service, and for the pods that match that label selector,
those pods IP and port pairs are going to be registered as endpoints in the
service and used for load balancing traffic to. Now if we remove a label from a
pod, it's no longer going to be load balanced to. Keep in mind this is independent
of a deployment and replica set controllers which monitor the number of pods,
that pod will still be there, it'll just no longer be low balanced to. Now this is just a
high-level overview of how labels and selectors work with services, and for the
deep dive into that topic, be sure to head over to my course, Managing the
Kubernetes API Server and Pods.
Introducing Service Types and Understanding ClusterIP
Internals
Now it's time to dig into the types of services available in Kubernetes and their
use cases, and today we're going to look at ClusterIP, NodePort, and
LoadBalancer. Each exposes a service to the network in a slightly different way
for varying use cases. These three services are the core way to expose
application services inside of a crew-managed cluster. There are additional
service types and implementations available, and we're going to cover those later
on in this module when we talk about service discovery and DNS. The ClusterIP
service is the first service type that we're going to look at today. Let's say in our
cluster we deploy some Pods, and these Pods are going to get IPs on the Pod
network. When we define a service of type cluster IP, it's going to get an IP
address assigned from the cluster network. That IP comes from a range of
addresses that are specified in the service cluster IP range parameter on both
the API server and controller manager's configuration. And so in our example
here, the IP address allocated is 10.1.22.10, and our service is listening on port 80.
Qproxy will configure the needed iptables rules for the servers on all nodes in the
cluster, defining the service's cluster IP address and port, and also implementing
the load balancing rules to the back-end Pod endpoints. These iptables rules are
defined on all nodes in the cluster. If traffic is a load balance to a Pod endpoint
that's not on the current node, that traffic we route across the Pod network to the
correct node to reach that Pod endpoint. If the Pod is on a current node, traffic
will be sent directly to that Pod endpoint on a local node. So if we want to access
the service, we'll send traffic to the ClusterIP address and port from inside a
cluster. For traffic destined to the ClusterIP, the iptables rules on that node
will intercept the traffic before it leaves a node. A Pod endpoint IP will be
selected from the iptables load balancing rules, and then iptables will send that
traffic to that selected Pod IP address over the Pod network. The ClusterIP
address is completely virtual and exists only inside iptables on the node. For our
discussion today, we're going to focus on Qproxy running in iptables mode as
that's the most common implementation. ClusterIP exposes the service on a
cluster internal IP address and is only available inside of the cluster. It's also the
default service type if you don't specify one in your service's configuration, and
it's the foundation that the other service types are built upon, which we'll explore
next in this module. A common use case for ClusterIP is for applications
or services that don't need to be accessed outside of the cluster or if we're going
to provide access via other means like Ingress, which we'll explore more in the
module Configuring and Managing Application Access with Ingress.
Understanding NodePort Internals
The next type of service that we're going to talk about is NodePort. Let's say we
have a cluster running some pods, and this time, we define our service type as
NodePort. What's going to happen is on each node, kube-proxy is going to
expose our service on the real IP of the node on each node in the cluster, and so
in this case here, 172.16.94.11 and 12. A NodePort port is assigned to the NodePort
service, and by default, the port range is 30,000 to 32,767. This port can be
dynamically allocated by the cluster or statically defined into the service
configuration. Our port here is 32,235. When you create a NodePort service, you
will also get a cluster IP service and port allocated and kube-proxy configures
that service on each node as well just like we looked at in the previous example.
With NodePort, traffic can come from outside of the cluster and can be sent to
any cluster node's real IP address on the NodePort services port, and so this
example here, 32,235. When the traffic is received on the node, kube-proxy will
route that traffic request to the internal cluster IP service and then a cluster IP
service will route that traffic to the pod endpoints just like we examined in the
previous slide. NodePort is commonly used when you need to integrate with
external load balancers, and in a second, we'll see how the NodePort service type
is used in cloud scenarios for load balancing. NodePort is also used in
development scenarios and desktop based clusters where you don't have access
to load balancer services, but want to expose your application outside of the
cluster onto the node network.
Understanding LoadBalancer Internals
The next service type that we're going to look at is load balancer. In our cluster, if
we start up some Pods and define a service type as load balancer, what we're
going to get is this. Our cluster is going to interact with our cloud provider and
provision a Cloud Load Balancer. That load balancer is going to get assigned a
real public IP from our cloud provider and will point users at that public IP
address for access to the services defined in our cluster. When you create a load
balancer service, you also get a NodePort service and ClusterIP service in your
service configuration. That load balancer is part of our cloud's infrastructure and
is external to our cluster. That load balancer sends traffic to the services in your
cluster by accessing the NodePort service on the node's real IPs. That NodePort
service sends the requests to the cluster IP service, which in turn sends the
request to the underlying Pods, just like we looked at in the previous
scenarios. And so if you log into your cloud load balancer, you'll see your nodes in
a load balancing pool. You'll find health probes on the NodePort service, and
you'll also find load balancing rules distributing the traffic to the NodePort
service on each node in your cluster.
Defining Deployments and Services
When it comes to defining services and manifests, they really work hand-in-hand
with deployments and so let's see how that all comes together in code. Inside of
our deployments pod template spec, we're going to define some labels. So in this
case here, you can see the label is run hello-world. Each pod that's created from
this deployment will have that label. Now in the service's definition in the spec,
we'll define a type. In this case, we're going to be using cluster IP. We'll also have
to define a selector and we use the label run hello-world. The pods that match
this label selector will get endpoints created automatically and registered in the
service, which will then affect that desired state on the nodes kube-proxy
configurations. Now I do want to call out that you could have more labels in a
deployment for other reasons, but you will have to have labels that match the
services selector for that pod to be a member of the service. Now for ports, we
can define one or more ports for a service, and so in this example here, we can
see that our port is port 80. Now this port is for accessing the service so users will
be pointed at this port. And then there is protocols which can be TCP, UDP, or
SCTP, in this case, we're using TCP. And then finally, there is target port, which is
the port of our container-based application in our pods, in this case it's 8080. Now
that's a declarative configuration in code. If we needed to create services
imperatively at the command line, well the first thing that we'll do is create a
deployment. And so here you can see kubectl create deployment, we give it a
name hello-world, and we define an image. This will create a deployment with
one replica. We can then scale that replica if needed. Then to expose that
deployment with a service, we can use this command, kubectl expose
deployment then a deployment name hello-world, the port that we want to send
users to, so in this case, port 80, and then a target port for the container based
application and then we can define a type, it could be load balancer, NodePort, or
ClusterIP, in this case, we're using NodePort.
Demo: Exposing and Accessing applications with
Services - ClusterIP
Alright, so let's get into our first demo in this module and look at exposing and
accessing applications with Services. We're going to look at three scenarios here:
ClusterIP, NodePort, and LoadBalancer. Let's get started. So here we are with an
SSH session open to c1-master1, and let's start going through some of those
demonstrations where we're going to expose some services with our various
service types, and we're going to start off with ClusterIP, and the very first thing
that we're going to do together here is create a deployment imperatively at the
command line. So here we see kubectl create deployment hello-world-
clusterip, and we're using our Hello World app image, so let's go ahead and run
that code to create that deployment, and there at the bottom we can see our
deployment was created. So the next step that we want to do to expose that
deployment as a service is use the kubectl expose command. So here on line 13,
we see kubectl expose deployment, then we define the deployment's name. So
there we see hello-world-clusterip. On the next line, we're defining the
parameters for the deployment. So there we see --port=80, that's the port that
we're going to access the application on, and then we see --target-port on
8080, that's the port inside of our container-based application inside of our
pods. And then the final parameter is --type ClusterIP, so let's go ahead and run
that code and create that service together, and there at the bottom we see
service/hello-world-clusterip exposed. If we didn't specify --type as a parameter
to the kubectl expose command, the default type will be ClusterIP. So, moving
ahead in our demo, let's go ahead and bring some more code into view here, if we
do a kubectl get service, there we can see in the listing our ClusterIP service, and
so let's walk through the output here together. We see the name, hello-world-
clusterip and the type, which is ClusterIP, and then we see our Cluster IP
address, 10.98.171.177, and that will persist for the lifetime of this service. Since it's
a Cluster IP service, we have no external IP, and there we see the port 80/TCP. So
let's go ahead and grab that SERVICEIP and store that in an environment
variable for reuse, and so on line 22 here let's go ahead and run that code and
grab that IP as a parameter, and we'll echo it out just to make sure that we have
our correct value, and there we can see our IP, 10.98.171.177. So to access our
application, we'll use the curl command. So curl http://, and then we'll use that
environment variable for our SERVICEIP, and there we can see we can access our
application with the appropriate output at the bottom. So, let's dig a little further
into what's behind the scenes for this particular service and look at the endpoints
that are available. If we do a kubectl get endpoints for our service, hello-world-
clusterip, we'll see that we have just one endpoint, and that's the pod with the IP
address of 192.168.131.32, running an application on the target port 8080. If we do
a kubectl get pods -o wide to look at our pods network configuration, we can see
that this is the pods supporting the service with the IP address of
192.168.131.32. Now, if we ever have to access an application directly, if we needed
to actually troubleshoot an individual pod that's up and running, well, we can
look at those endpoints and so let's go ahead and do that again, we'll do a
kubectl get endpoints, and we can see the listing of endpoints, and if we know a
particular pod is causing us trouble, well inside of our cluster, we can grab that
PODIP, which we're doing here on line 38 and storing it in an environment
variable, then we can access our application directly for that exact pod using the
PODIP when we're inside of the cluster. So there I'm using curl against the
individual PODIP on that container-based application's target port, which is
8080, and so if I ever have to troubleshoot, I'm able to use this technique
to isolate an individual pod. So, let's go ahead and extend this a little bit, let's
use kubectl scale on our deployment to expand the number of replicas
supporting our deployment. So let's go ahead and run that code there to scale
our deployment up to six replicas, and so now if we look at our endpoints, we'll
see in the listing, all of the endpoints behind the service, and so in that list there
we can see our 131.32 pod that we started with and some additional pods have
been added to that list. And so now if we hit our service, our request will be load
balanced across the pods supporting the service that are registered as endpoints,
and so there we can see the different pod names as I hit that service over and
over again. If you want to look at that from a different angle, we can use my
favorite Kubernetes command, kubectl describe, we'll describe the service that
we're working with, which is hello-world-clusterip, so let's go ahead and run that
code there. Inside of here, let's kind of walk through this core information. So,
kubectl describe gives us that deep dive information about an object. So here we
see the name and the namespace, and now the labels here are the labels for this
individual resource, in this case it's the service. The selector, which is app=hello-
world-clusterip, is what's going to determine which pods are a member of the
service. There we see the Type: ClusterIP, we have our IP address, and then the
port that our service is running on, and then there we see TargetPort, which is
where our application is running, and also a listing of endpoints. So a very good
command to get kind of a view of the whole state of our service. Now that
selector I want to call out again as app=hello-world-clusterip. If I do a kubectl get
pods --show-labels, then we can see that that label is associated with the pods
that are up and running supporting the service, and so there on the right, we see
app=hello-world-clusterip. So, let's go ahead and delete this deployment and the
service, and clean up this part of the demo before we move into the next part of
the demo.
Demo: Exposing and Accessing applications with
Services - NodePort
So let's go ahead and bring some new code in the view, and now we're going to
work with some node port services, creating them and accessing them. And so
let's start off with creating the deployment again, which will start up our hello-
world-nodeport deployment. Now on line 71 here, very similar to the previous
command, we're going to expose the deployment, but this time we're going to
change the type to nodeport, so that's got to run that code there. Now let's go
down a little bit further and use kubectl get service to get the information about
that service that was created. So in our output here, we can see the name is
hello-world-nodeport, and the type is nodeport. We still have a ClusterIP, and so
in this case, it's going to be 10.110.42.255. Now we have no external IP, and we can
see the ports, we have a little bit of a different representation than what we've
been used to when we've been looking at ClusterIP services. We have two ports
in here separated by a colon. The port on the left is associated with the ClusterIP
service for this particular service. Now recall, our nodeport service is actually
backended by a ClusterIP service, and so as traffic comes in on the nodeport
ports, it'll get routed to that ClusterIP service. The port to the right of the colon,
30177, that's our nodeport port, and so that's where we'll send traffic to, external
to the cluster to access our nodeport service. Let's go ahead and grab some of
that critical information and store that as environment variables so that we can
reuse it over and over throughout our demonstrations here. We're going to grab
the CLUSTERIP, we're going to grab the ClusterIP services PORT, and we're also
going to grab that NODEPORT port and store those all as environment
variables. So it's going to run that code and move forward in our demo. Now I
want to call out that for this particular deployment, there's only one Pod that's up
and running, supporting our applications, so there we can see hello-world-
nodeport. Now that one Pod is running on node c1-node1. We can hit any node
in the cluster and it's the responsibility of the Qproxy to route that request to the
node that has an actual Pod. And so let's go ahead and do that here. If I access
the NODEPORT service on c1-master1 I get to our Pod. If I access it on c1-node1
using the NODEPORT port, I get back to that same Pod. Regardless of which
node I try to access the nodeport service on, it's the responsibility of that node's
Qproxy to route the traffic to the ClusterIP service, which will then send
that traffic across the Pod network to whatever node is actually hosting the Pod
at that point in time. So let's go ahead and move forward in this demo, and just
want to call out that we still have a ClusterIP service behind our nodeport service,
and that's what's actually servicing the requests coming from the nodeport
service. If we do an echo, just to look at our information error, we can see the
CLUSTERIP, and if I try to access it, I'm accessing that same exact Pod. Cool. Let's
go ahead and move forward and delete this information and clean that up as we
move into the next demo where we're going to work with the service type load
balancer.
Demo: Exposing and Accessing applications with
Services - LoadBalancer
So moving forward, I'm going to switch our context from our local cluster into a
cloud cluster because I want to be able to consume the load balancer service and
work with an actual cloud load balancer and we don't have that capability in our
on-prem cluster, so let's go ahead and switch context there. Now same
pattern, we're going to create a deployment, and this time, we're going to call it
hello-world-loadbalancer. Let's go ahead and run that there, our deployment was
created, and now we're going to expose our deployment as a service. This time
we're going to specify the type as load balancer so let's go ahead and run that
code there to create our load balancer service which will then work with our
cloud provider to provision a cloud load balancer and a real public IP. And so if I
do a kubectl get service now, we can see I have a service that's up and running.
Let's walk through this output together. We see hello-world-loadbalancer, that's
the name, the type of the service is load balancer. This service too will have a
ClusterIP. There we see it's 10.0.46.49. Our external IP is currently pending and so
what's happening behind the scenes is Azure is provisioning that real
load balancer and a public IP for that. Once that is finished, then that information
will be reported back to the service and it will become available to us. We also
see our cluster IP port, which is 80, and our NodePort service, which is 3239.
So let's go ahead and check the service again to see if we have our public IP, it's
still pending. So let's go ahead and do this, let's go ahead and add a watch, we'll
do an up arrow --watch, and with this, we'll be able to watch that service until we
get our public IP allocated by Azure. Now I do want to call out that this
demonstration isn't specific to Azure, this can be in any of the public clouds that
support the service type load balancer, and there we can see we have our public
IP address provisioned 52.177.247.61. So let's go ahead and break out of this watch
with the Ctrl+C and move forward in our demonstration. So we'll grab that public
IP and store that in an environment variable and then we'll try to access our
service on that real public IP address. And so I'll use the curl command to do that
on the services port which is port 80. Go ahead and run that code there and
there we can see the output from our application. Alright, so moving forward in
this demonstration, let's go ahead and do a kubectl get service hello-world-
loadbalancer and look at that information one more time. So there we see our
external IP is populated in our services information, and to recap what's going on
here, when we access that external IP on that cloud load balancer, that cloud
load balancer is going to send its traffic to the NodePort service, the NodePort
service is then going to send a traffic onto the cluster IP service which will then
route it to an individual pod that services our deployment. So let's go ahead and
clean up this demo, we'll delete our deployment and our service from Azure. With
our load balancer and our deployment deleted, let's go ahead and switch our
contacts back to our local on-prem cluster. Now I have some additional examples
for you at the bottom here for you to do on your own. The demonstrations that
we did in this demo so far have all been using imperative commands. If you want
to work with declarative commands, I have the YAML files in the downloads that'll
be available to you. And it's the same demonstration, is just using the YAML files
describing what you want Kubernetes to do for you.
Service Discovery with DNS and Environment Variables
and Other Types of Services
One of the key ideas behind Kubernetes is infrastructure independence. In our
applications, we want to avoid configuring settings pointing to
static configurations like IP addresses or pod names and services
provided abstraction around our applications to help us do this, but how can we
access service information dynamically inside of the cluster? Kubernetes
provides two key ways to discover services running in the cluster saving us from
defining infrastructure-specific configuration and that's DNS and environment
variables. Now, let's take a closer look at each. The key way that you'll want to
discover services in your cluster is with DNS so let's take a look at that first. As
you create services in your cluster, each service is going to get a DNS record in
cluster DNS. So normal services like ClusterIP, NodePort, and load balancer will
get A or AAAA records in cluster DNS depending on if they're IPv4 or IPv6. You
can use these DNS records in your application configurations. You'll get a DNS
record in a format that looks like this where it's service name and then a dot
followed by the namespace that that service is in followed by a dot, then the
string svc followed by your cluster domain name. And so, as an example here, we
see hello-world.default.svc.cluster.local where hello-world is the name of our
service, default is the name of the namespace, svc is that static string, and
cluster.local is our cluster domain. Now we're going to discuss additional service
types a little bit later in the module and how they interact with DNS. We'll look at
things like headless services and external name services. When you create a
namespace in Kubernetes, you'll get a DNS subdomain for that namespace. For
example, if I created a namespace named NS1, I'll get a subdomain that looks
something like this, ns1.svc.cluster.local, and as I create services in that
namespace, they'll get DNS records created in that DNS subdomain. Now,
another key element of service discovery is environment variables. For each
service available at the time a pod is created, there is a collection of environment
variables defined giving information about the services that are up and
running. You'll get environment variables for the various configuration elements
of a service so things like its IP address, its port, its name, and so on. For more
information on defining, using, and the lifecycle of environment variables, check
out my course, Configuring and Managing Kubernetes Storage and Scheduling in
the module, Configuration as Data, Environment Variables, Secrets, and Config
Maps where I go into great detail about this. For this module, we're going to be
focused on services and service discovery and we'll have lots of demos coming
up shortly looking at both of these methods, DNS and environment variables. In
addition to the core service types that we've covered so far in this module, there
are some additional service types and service configurations that I want to
introduce you to now, external name, headless services, and services
without selectors and let's dig into each of these now. External name provides
the benefits of service discovery for services that are external to your cluster. In
the definition of an external name service, you'll define a DNS name for a service
outside of your cluster and Kubernetes will create a C name record for that
service pointing to that external services DNS name. This way, your internal
applications can use service discovery techniques like DNS and environment
variables to find this external service. Next is headless service. A headless service
is a service with no ClusterIP defined. If you define a headless service with
selectors, you'll get DNS records defined for each endpoint IP that matches
the selector. When you query DNS for that headless service, it will return all pod
IPs in the result set and then the client gets to decide which one of these IPs it's
going to use. This is commonly used in database systems and also is used in
stateful sets. And then finally, services without selectors. Services without
selectors enable you to map services to specific endpoints, and since you're not
defining a selector, you'll need to manually create the endpoint objects. This
means in that endpoint object, you can define whatever IP import that you like
and these IPs can be inside or outside of your cluster. If you add multiple
endpoints, then it'll be load balanced just like regular services. Services without
selectors are used what you want to manually control where you want to send
traffic to, but still have the benefits of service discovery.
Demo: Service Discovery with DNS
Time for a demo. Let's look at service discovery methods, specifically DNS and
environment variables. We'll also look at how to create an ExternalName service.
Alright, so here we are logged into c1-master1 and let's go through working with
service discovery and we're going to look at DNS and environment variables. We'll
start off with DNS. The first thing that we're going to do is to create a deployment
in the default namespace, and then we're also going to go ahead and expose that
as a service. We'll do that with kubectl expose and we're also going to define it as
type ClusterIP. So moving forward, we want to be able to run DNS queries against
our cluster DNS server. If I just ran DNS queries from c1-master1, I would actually
use my node's local DNS servers as defined in etc/resolve.conf. Let's go ahead
and grab our cluster DNS DNS service IP and use that so we can send queries
directly to that service, and with kubectl get service kube-dns from the
namespace kube-system, we can see that the ClusterIP for our DNS service is
10.96.0.10. So moving forward in our demo, we can use nslookup to query our
DNS server and let's walk through what we're doing on Line 24 here. And so on
Line 24 here with nslookup, I'm going to pass in a DNS record hello-world-
clusterip.default.svc.cluster.local and let's walk through that DNS name together.
We can see the service name hello-world-clusterip, then default, which is the
namespace that that service was created in, then we see the static string svc
followed by our cluster domain name, which is cluster.local. Now we're going to
send that DNS query directly to our cluster DNS service at 10.96.0.10. Let's go
ahead and run that code there and we can see we get a result. In our result, let's
kind of walk through this line-by-line together. We can see the server that we
sent the query to was 10.96.0.10. The name that we asked for was our hello-world-
clusterip.default.svc.cluster.local name and then it returned to us the address
10.111.188.160 and let's go ahead and verify to make sure that that's actually our
ClusterIP, and we can do that with kubectl get service hello-world-clusterip, and
in that output there, we can confirm that we got the right address back
10.111.188.160. And so, each service that gets created is going to get a DNS
record created in cluster DNS just like we looked at here. So let's go ahead and
do another example inside of a namespace. So let's go ahead and bring this code
into view. We'll go ahead and create a namespace with kubectl create
namespace ns1. We'll create a deployment named hello-world-clusterip, and we'll
also expose it as a service. So there we see kubectl expose deployment hello-
world-clusterip, and both of those commands are being executed in the
namespace ns1, and so now we actually have two services with the exact same
names, hello-world-clusterip, but they're in different namespaces, which means
they'll have also different DNS subdomains. And so there on Line 43, we can see
that information. So let's run this DNS query against this new DNS record. So we
have nslookup, and there we see hello-world-clusterip, but this time rather than
default, we have our namespace ns1.svc.cluster.local, and we're going to initiate
that query against 10.96.0.10, which is our cluster DNS service and there we can
see hello-world-clusterip from ns1 gives us a different IP, which is now
10.104.232.13, and if you want, we can go ahead and compare that result with the
other DNS record in the default zone and we can see that's on a different IP
address, so there we see 10.111.188.160.
Demo: Service Discovery - Environment Variables
Now moving forward, let's get into the environment variable side of the
house. And we have a deployment that's up and running, so let's go ahead and
grab a PODNAME from that deployment, and make sure we have a
PODNAME. We'll echo that out to the console and there we can see the
PODNAME. So let's use kubectl exec -it against that PODNAME and execute
the command env and then pipe its output to sort, and that's going to list all of
the defined environment variables in the shell and then sort that output for us
so that we can read it easily. If I run this command now, you can see I have a
collection of environment variables. I have several environment variables that are
going to be defined just as part of the base OS, but the services, those ones there
that start with KUBERNETES, are the ones that were defined for us by
Kubernetes when it started up the Pod. And the only service that was available at
the time this Pod started up was the actual Kubernetes service, and so there we
can see all the different variations of the environment variables that are created
to represent that service's configuration. But you might be wondering, where's
the hello-world service? We created that service. Right, we did, but I created the
deployment first, which deployed the pod, and then I created the service second,
which then created the service, and so at the time that that Pod started up, that
service didn't exist yet, so it's not here inside this collection of environment
variables because they're only defined at Pod startup. And so we can get around
that by deleting this Pod and letting it recreate, and so let's go ahead and do that
now. We'll do a kubectl delete pod against that PODNAME. That Pod will be
immediately recreated by the deployments replica set controller, and now let's go
ahead and run that same command again. We'll get the new PODNAME. Let's go
ahead and echo that out. And now if I run that same command against the
Pod, env | sort, and I scroll up a little bit in the output here, you can see our
HELLO_WORLD_CLUSTERIP service has a collection of environment variables
available. And this is one of the key reasons why you prefer DNS over
environment variables, because DNS information is more easily updated
without having to terminate and start new Pods. So let's go ahead and move
forward and look at an ExternalName service. And so inside this YAML file here,
service-externalname.yaml, I've defined an ExternalName service. Let's go ahead
and bring that into view. So walking through this configuration here, we have our
API version v1, our kind is Service, our metadata is the name of the object that
we're going to create, so that's going to be hello-world.api. Inside of the spec,
we're going to define the type of service, and that's going to be
ExternalName. Now, the only element that we have to define is the ExternalName
parameter. So here you see hello-world.api.example.com, and so we're going to
create a service named hello-world.api, and that's going to be a cluster service,
but it's going to have a CNAME record that points to this DNS name here that
we're defining on line 7. So let's go ahead and jump back over to our driver script
and run that code. There we see service/hello-world-api is created. And so now if
I run a DNS query against hello-world-api.default.svc.cluster.local against our
cluster DNS server, what we'll get is the CNAME record pointing to that
ExternalName, and so let's walk through the output at the bottom here. So from
our cluster DNS server at 10.96.0.10, we asked for the DNS record hello-world-
api.default.svc.cluster.local, and the return, the data that we got back from that
query, is a CNAME, or a canonical name, which is hello-
world.api.example.com. And so whenever I ask for hello-world-
api.default.svc.cluster.local, I will get hello-world.api,example.com in the return. So
let's go ahead and move forward and clean up our demos and delete all of the
resources that we created and move on into the next part of the course.
Module Review and What's Next!
Alright, that's a wrap for this module. We started this module off with
understanding services and why they're needed, and then we dove into the
types of services that are available: ClusterIP, NodePort, and LoadBalancer, and
then we looked very closely into how they work and build on top of each
other. And we wrapped up the module with Service Discovery using DNS
and environment variables to locate services. Well that's a wrap for this module,
please join me in the next module, Configuring and Managing Application Access
with Ingress.
Configuring and Managing Application Access
with Ingress
Introduction, Course and Module Overview
Hello, this is Anthony Nocentino with Centino Systems. Welcome to my course,
Configuring and Managing Kubernetes Networking, Services, and Ingress. This
module is Configuring and Managing Application Access with Ingress. In this
module, we're going to dive into ingress concepts and architecture, looking at
how we could expose HTTP-based applications to external users outside of the
cluster. We'll dig into some common use cases for ingress, focusing on simple
services, name-based virtual hosts, content routing, and also TLS
configurations. We just wrapped up the module on Configuring and Managing
Application Access with Services, now let's dig in and see how we can do the
same with ingress. In this module, we're going to start off with an overview of
ingress and its architecture, looking at how the Kubernetes ingress object is used
to define access rules for applications in our cluster, and then we'll look at how
the ingress controller is used to implement those rules. Once we understand the
theory and the architecture, we'll look at a series of use cases for ingress, such as
exposing cluster services externally, content routing, name-based virtual hosts,
and TLS configurations.
Ingress Architecture and Overview
Let's start off with an overview of Kubernetes Ingress architecture, and first up,
there is the Ingress resource, which defines how HTTP services in a cluster can
be accessed externally, essentially the rules for how requests are passed into the
cluster to access pod endpoints running web applications. We can get very
creative here in our configurations for exposing services, and we're going to
explore some of those today in this module. Working in conjunction with the
Ingress resource is the Ingress controller, which is the actual implementation, or
the thing that implements the Ingress resource's rules. It's the Ingress controller
that actually provides access to the cluster-based services. This is generally an
HTTP reverse proxy. It receives the connection, finds a matching rule, and passes
the traffic directly to the services pod and points to respond to the request. And
then finally, the Ingress class. In a cluster, you may have more than one Ingress
controller and the Ingress class gives you the ability to associate an Ingress
resource with a specific Ingress controller in a cluster. It also defines a default
Ingress class by defining the isDefault class annotation on the Ingress class. So,
to bring this all together, you deploy an Ingress controller, you create an Ingress
class for your Ingress controller, you then define Ingress resources referencing
the Ingress class that you want to use, and also define the routing rules for your
traffic. So, as we've introduced so far, the Ingress resource is where we define
the rules for external access to HTTP-based services in our cluster. Now in
addition to providing external access, the Ingress will provide load balancing
directly to the endpoints in the cluster, bypassing the cluster IP service. Now, in
addition to those capabilities, Ingress gives us the ability to do name-based
virtual hosting, enabling us to provide access to many different services inside
of our cluster, based on the host header in the HTTP request. An Ingress will read
the host header and send the request to the correct back end cluster
service. This is valuable because it reduces the amount of public IPs and
resources needed to support multiple web applications, since we can handle
these requests on one public IP address and route the traffic to a specific service
in the cluster based on the contents of the host header. Additionally, Ingress
could do path-based routing. So as requests come into the Ingress controller
based on the path in the URL, we can direct requests to unique services inside of
the cluster, giving us very granular control on where incoming traffic is routed to.
And last, but not least, Ingress gives us the ability to implement TLS
termination. We can define in our Ingress resource, a certificate configuration and
use that to provide encryption from the client browser to the Ingress
controller. Now, in this course, we're going to do a basic introduction to
Ingress. For a much deeper dive into managing incoming traffic, head over to my
colleague, Nigel Brown's course, Managing Ingress Traffic Patterns for
Kubernetes Services.
Understanding the Ingress Controller and Why Use
Ingress Rather Than Load Balancers
So far we've introduced that the Ingress resource defines the rules and the
configuration and it's the Ingress controller that implements those rules. Let's
take a second to look more closely at the Ingress controller. Ingress controllers
are things running in your cluster or adjacent to your cluster, and there's many
different types of Ingress controllers available and their implementations vary. So,
they could be running as Pods in your cluster, as is the case with the NGINX
Ingress controller, which is what we're going to be using in our demos today. An
Ingress controller can also be external hardware to your cluster, perhaps a load
balancer from Citrix, F5, or other hardware vendor. There's also cloud Ingress
controllers, which run external to the cluster in various cloud providers such as
Azure's App Gateway, Google Load Balancer, and more. Kubernetes defines an
interface spec, which is used to define how the Ingress objects
exchange configuration in state to the Ingress controllers. And so that's how
Kubernetes is able to ensure stability and compatibility, and how the Ingress
resource is able to configure the Ingress controller in a defined, structured
way. Now that you know what Ingress does, you might be asking why Ingress
rather than load balancers? Let's take some time to call out why you'd use
Ingress instead of load balancers. Ingress functions at Layer 7. This gives Ingress
the ability to do things like path-based routing and name-based virtual hosts. In
addition to that, Ingress controllers can implement higher-level capabilities such
as URL rerouting, session persistency, and dynamic waiting. Traditional load
balancers don't have these capabilities and can load balance traffic only on IP
and port. Ingress controllers are a single resource that can provide access to
multiple internal services, where load balancers expose a single service on a
single IP and port. This reduces resources consumed, which in some scenarios,
can even save you on your cloud bill. And finally, when using an Ingress
controller, your applications can experience reduced latency since requests
are sent directly to Pod endpoints, rather than to Qproxy, which would then route
to Pod endpoints and perhaps even routing traffic between nodes. Now I do want
to call out that this is for HTTP-based applications. You would need load
balancers for load balancing TCP or UDP-based services functioning at Layer 4.
Exposing a Single Service with Ingress
Now, let's look at some example ingress use cases. We'll first look at this from the
cluster networking standpoint and then next dig into the code for its
implementation. If we have a cluster that's running some pods which are front
ended with a Cluster IP-based service, and we want to provide access to these
pod-based applications within ingress, we'll first define an ingress controller
and then create an ingress resource defining access rules for accessing
these services outside of the cluster. Our ingress controller will expose a
service of type NodePort or LoadBalancer, depending on our infrastructure.
Requests will come in on the NodePort IP or the public IP, and then they will
get routed to the ingress controller pod via the NodePort or
LoadBalancer service. Then the ingress controller will route that traffic to the
correct back end pod endpoint based on what's defined in the ingress resource.
Now, I do want to call out that the implementation of ingress controllers can
vary, but this is a common pattern, and it's what we're going to see today with
our Nginx ingress controller. So now that we know how ingress works and where
it fits in in our cluster network, let's dig into the code and learn how to expose a
single service with ingress. First up, we'll define an API version. So here you can
see it's networking.k8s.io/v1. We'll define the kind as Ingress, and the metadata
will give this ingress a name of ingress-single. Inside of the spec, we'll define our
ingressClassName. The ingress class name is the ingress controller that will
implement the ingress resources that we're defining here, and so in our case,
that's going to be nginx. In our upcoming demo, we'll deploy an nginx-based
ingress controller that will also create the nginx ingress class resource for us. Next
up is the defaultBackend. A defaultBackend is used to accept all requests where
an incoming request doesn't find a matching rule, or there are no rules defined, as
is the case with this example here. And so in this example here, we're going to
send all traffic to a single service, and that service is going to be hello-world-
service-single. That service is going to be running on port 80, and so what we'll
have here with this code is an ingress with a default back end that will accept all
requests and then send all of those requests to our hello-world-service-single
service.
Exposing a Multiple Services with Ingress Using Path
Based Routing
Now let's look at another scenario where we have multiple services running inside
of our cluster, and we want to expose them outside of the cluster and route
traffic to the services based on the URL path. In this scenario, let's say we have
some pods that are up and running, and we're exposing cluster IP services named
Blue and Red. Now I do want to call out that the colored dots here represent the
network that these resources are on, so the pods are on the pod network, and the
services are on the cluster network. The next thing that we're going to do is
define some Ingress rules to define path-based routing, and then deploy an
Ingress controller, and that's going to expose our resources on a public IP
address. Now, I do want to call out that we could have a single Ingress controller
implementing various access patterns, but as we walk through these scenarios
here, I'm going to describe each as an independent deployment. In the
demos, we're going to see how we can combine several different access patterns
together. Now as traffic comes into the Ingress controller, we can use path-based
routing in our Ingress rules to look at the URL request and route it to the correct
services pods. And so as requests come in, we can route them based on the
path. And so for example, if a request comes in on path.example.com/red, we can
route that to the Red service. And the same would go for /blue. We could take
that traffic and route that directly to the Blue service. Now, let's look at the code
to do just that. The code for exposing multiple services with path-based routing
looks like this. In the spec for our Ingress resource, we'll define our Ingress
class name, which here is nginx. Next, we'll define some rules. A rule defines how
traffic is handled when received by the Ingress controller, and to start, we'll
define a host for the Ingress to listen on, and in our example here, that's going to
be path.example.com. And so incoming traffic will need to present this host name
in the incoming request. Then we specify the rule type, and that's going to be
http. Within that, we define a collection of paths to route on. In our example here,
the path is going to be /red. We then define the path type, which here, we're
going to use prefix. Path type is a way to define how to match the incoming
request to a defined path, and the choices are prefix exact, or
implementation specific. Prefix will perform a partial prefix match based on the
path in the request, and exact means the request coming in must be an
exact case-sensitive match for it to match. Implementation specific pushes this
configuration responsibility from the Ingress into the Ingress class resource. And
so in our example here, we're using prefix, so a URL request path coming in
beginning with /red will match on this path. In the/red path, we define a back end
to send the request to. The service for this back end is going to be hello-world-
service-red, and the service port is going to be 4242. This service here is a cluster
IP-based service running in our cluster on port 4242. With the /red path defined,
let's move on to defining a blue path. Its path type is going to be exact. Using the
exact path type means that this path will only match with the URL request
that's exactly /blue and that's case sensitive. Next, we'll define the back end
service, and that's going to be hello-world-service-blue, and this service is going
to run on port 4343. Now these service ports defined for the paths here are for
the backing cluster IP services. Our Ingress will listen on port 80 for the incoming
HTTP requests and route traffic based on the rules defined here, using these
paths and path types. But what if a request comes in that's not on /red or not on /
blue? With this config here, our clients will get a 404 Resource not found error,
and that's probably not what we want in our application. Now, in this scenario, we
can define what's called a default back end, and then specify the service that we
want to send traffic to, and that's going to be, in this case, hello-world-service-
single. This service is going to be listening on cluster IP port 80. So users
accessing paths that are not /red or not /blue will hit this service, and so this
could be some sort of error page or a redirect, but the idea here is not letting
your users get a 404, because that's probably not what we want in our
applications.
Using Name Based Virtual Hosts with Ingress
The next scenario that I want to show you is name based virtual hosts with
ingress. This gives us the ability to route incoming HTTP requests based on the
host name coming into the ingress controller. So, same apps and services as
before, and we'll deploy an ingress resource that will define our rules supporting
name based virtual hosts, and then we'll deploy an ingress controller. That ingress
controller is exposed as a load balancer service on a public IP. To direct requests
to the appropriate back end services, we'll use hosts defined in our ingress
rules, which will enable name based virtual hosting. So, in our example here, we're
going to have red.example.com and blue.example.com for our name based virtual
hosts. Now, in addition to this configuration, we'll also need DNS A records
defined for these host names. As requests come into the ingress controller on the
domain red.example.com or blue.example.com, based on those names, the
ingress controller will look at the host header in the request and route that
request to the appropriate back end service, whether it's red or blue, and so let's
check out the code to do just that. And so let's look at how to implement name
based virtual hosts with ingress. In the spec for the resource we start by defining
the ingressClassName, and in our example here that'll still be nginx. Then we'll
define some rules. First we'll define a host for the ingress to listen on. In this case,
it's going to be red.example.com. We'll go on to define the elements of the
rule, and we're giong to start off with its type http, and for paths, the pathType
will be Prefix, and for the path itself it's going to be a single forward slash, so that
all requests coming in on this host name are sent to this back end, and as for that
back end, we're going to be using a service that's named hello-world-service-
red, listening on port 4242. Now, that's the first name based virtual host, let's do a
second. We'll define blue.example.com. It's going to be of type http, and inside of
path we'll have a pathType of prefix, and the path itself will be a single forward
slash. As for the service that it's going to go to, here we see the backend, and the
service is going to be hello-world-service-blue listening on port 4343. And so, any
requests coming in on blue.example.com will be sent to hello-world-service-blue,
and any requests coming in on red.example.com will be sent to hello-world-
service-red.
Using TLS Certificates with Ingress
Now, the final scenario that I want to show you today is how to enable TLS
encryption on your ingress controller, providing TLS termination for your pod-
based applications. So, the first thing that you need in this scenario is a certificate
stored as a secret in your cluster, and so let's assume that I have one already, and
when we get into the demos, I'll show you how to generate one for testing. Now
in the spec for the ingress resource, of course we need to define an ingress
class, in this case it's going to be nginx. Then in the TLS section, that's where
you'll define one or many host names, which are the host names defined in your
certificate. So here it's going to be tls.example.com. And then next you'll define a
secretName, specifying the secret that contains your certificate and its private
key. Then in the ingress rules, you'll build up a rule using some of the same
techniques that I've introduced so far in this module, and in this case, what we're
going to do is route incoming requests to a single service. In the host section,
you'll define a host name that matches the one defined in the TLS section, both
being tls.example.com. This rule is going to be of type http, and for paths we'll
define a single path of a forward slash. Its path type will be Prefix, so all
requests coming into this host name are going to be sent to a single back
end service, regardless of the path, and that back end service in this case is going
to be hello-world-service-single. And, that service is going to be running on port
80. Now, I do want to call out that this TLS certificate is going to be on the ingress
controller listening on port 443 by default, and it will encrypt traffic from the
HTTP client to the ingress controller. From the ingress controller to the pod, that
traffic will be unencrypted, running on port 80.
Demo: Deploying the NGINX Ingress Controller
Alright, so let's get into a demo and look at using ingress to provide access to a
single service, multiple services, services using a default backend, name based
virtual hosts, and a TLS configuration. Here we are logged into c1-cp1, and the
very first thing that we want to do today is to deploy an ingress
controller. Now, we're going to go with the nginx ingress controller running inside
of a pod in our on-premises cluster. The nginx ingress controller supports
several different deployment scenarios, Cloud, Bare Metal, and several different
managed service providers. If you follow the link here on line 10, you'll find
deployment manifests for these various scenarios. In the course downloads I'm
going to include demo scripts and deployment manifests for both the Bare Metal
and Cloud deployments, and so you can choose where you'd like to deploy your
nginx ingress controller. For the demos that we're going to walk through today,
I'm going to use a Bare Metal deployment in our on-premises Kubernetes
cluster, the one that we built together in the course, Kubernetes Installation and
Configuration Fundamentals. We're going to expose our ingress controller as
a NodPort service in that cluster. If you want to do the Cloud demos in one of the
managed platforms like AKS or GKE, the ingress would be exposed as a load
balancer service. In the course downloads, both the Cloud and Bare Metal
ingress demo scripts are conceptually identical, covering the same exact ingress
configurations, it's just that the service type is different, exposing our ingress
controller as either a NodePort service or a LoadBalancer service, depending on
where we deploy. And so let's move forward into our demo now with our
NodePort based deployments, and the very first thing that we're going to do is
ensure that we are pointing at the correct Kubernetes cluster, our on-premises
Kubernetes cluster, and that's what we're doing here on line 15 by making sure
that we're pointed at the right context. Now, on line 16 here, I have the
deployment yaml that I downloaded from the GitHub page for the nginx ingress
controller. That manifest is also part of your course downloads for both the Bare
Metal and cloud deployments, and here let's go ahead and apply the Bare Metal
deployment manifest, and that'll go through and create all the appropriate
resources to stand up our nginx based ingress controller. And so moving
forward, let's look at the status of that deployment. We can do that with kubectl
get pods, in the namespace, ingress-nginx, that's where all of those resources
were created. And looking at the bottom here, you can see we have three
pods, two of which have a status of Completed, and the last one being our
nginx ingress controller and it is certainly up and running. In addition to the pod,
we'll also get a service in that same namespace, ingress-nginx, let's go ahead and
check out the status of that. We'll do a kubectl get services --namespace ingress-
nginx, and we have two at the bottom here, the first of which is our ingress-nginx-
controller of type NodePort, it's got a ClusterIP, and on the right there we can see
the NodePort services associated with this particular ingress controller, our http
based service on port 80 with a NodePort 30273, and 443 for https on the
NodePort 31591. Now, when we rolled out that deployment for our nginx ingress
controller, it also created an ingress class for us, so let's check that out right now.
We'll do a kubectl describe ingressclasses nginx, and we can see that our nginx
ingress class is available for us to use. Currently it has no annotations. If we
wanted to make this the default ingress class, we can use this code here on line
34 to add an annotation, kubectl annotate ingressclasses nginx, then we define is-
default-class=true as part of that annotation. I'm going to leave that off so that
we have to go through and explicitly define our ingress class name in our
deployment manifests for our ingresses. If you want to leverage this capability of
having a default ingress class, apply this code here and then you can omit the
ingress class name in each of your ingress's configurations.
Demo: Exposing a Single Service with Ingress
And so with our ingress controller up and running, let's move on to creating our
first ingress together for a single service. And so what we'll do here on lines 40,
41, and 42 is we're going to create a deployment with our Hello World
application, we're going to scale that to two replicas, and then we'll expose that
as a Cluster IP based service. We're going to run this service on port 80, and it's
going to have the name hello-world-service-single. Let's go ahead and run that
code together here on line 42 to expose our service. Now, with our service up and
running, we want to make it accessible outside of our cluster with an ingress, and
let's look at the code to do that in the manifest ingress-single.yaml. So let's
go ahead and open up that file and look at this code, and so just like we looked
at in the presentation portion of the course, a very basic simple service exposed
as an ingress. We have our apiVersion, networking.k8s.io/v1, kind is Ingress, we
gave it a name of ingress-single. Inside of the spec, there we've defined
our ingressClassName, because we did not define a default ingress class when we
deployed that, and we're going to use the defaultBackend pointing to a service
that has the name of hello-world-service-single, running on port 80. So let's jump
back here and roll that out with kubectl apply -f ingress-single.yaml, and at the
bottom there we can see ingress-single created. So let's move forward and see
how we can access that service that's exposed as an ingress. So what we do here
on line 53 is kubectl get ingress --watch, and if you notice, the first output you
have is there's no IP address populated by the ingress, you're going to wait for a
second and then that IP address will be populated, and then that means our
ingress controller is configured and ready to receive requests for this particular
ingress that would create it. Now, what IP address do we want to send our traffic
to? Let's check out kubectl get services --namespace ingress-nginx. We're going
to send our traffic to the NodePort service that's exposed in our cluster, so we
can send traffic to any IP address at any node in our cluster on the port 30273 to
get access to the HTTP endpoints in our services that are exposed as ingresses in
our cluster, and so, let's move forward and look at our ingress in much more detail
with kubectl describe ingress ingress-single. And so, in the output at the bottom
here we have Name: ingress-single in the default namespace and an address of
172.16.94.12. That's the IP address of the node that our ingress controller pod is
running on. We can send traffic to any of the nodes in our cluster, because it's a
NodePort service, and it'll get routed to the ingress controller. Since we're using a
default backend with no rules, we see Default backend: hello-world-service-
single port 80, and there we see in parentheses the pod endpoints that this
ingress will route to. And so even though it says the service name there, the
service is bypass to skip that extra hop in the kubelet and the request will be sent
directly to the pod endpoints in a load balancing fashion. Now for the rules, we
see Host asterisk and Path asterisk, so any incoming requests on any host name
onto any path will get routed to the backend, hello-world-service-single, and
again, in parentheses to both of those pod endpoints there. And so let's go ahead
and try to access our application that's up and running. The first thing that we'll
do here is on line 64 is we'll use kubectl get ingresses and pull out of the jsonpath
output, the IP address of our NodePort service, let's go ahead and grab that, and
we'll use the same technique on line 65 with kubectl get svc for the ingress-
nginx-controller service, and we'll get the actual NodePort for our HTTP service.
And so let's go ahead and check to make sure we have appropriate values there,
and we're going to echo out those two variables that we just loaded up, so there
we see the NodePort IP of 172.16.94.12, and the NodePort port of 30273. And so
now if I use curl to access our service, you can see I'm hitting hello-world-service-
single in the output at the bottom there.
Demo: Exposing a Multiple Services with Ingress Using
Path Based Routing
Now for our next demo we're going to access multiple services with path-based
routing, so let's go ahead and create a couple services and expose those. So on
line 74 I'm going to create a deployment for hello-world-service-blue and on line
75 I'm going to create a deployment for hello-world-service-red, so both of those
are up and running. And now we're going to expose the deployments on two
different ports, and so let's go ahead and do that. On line 77, add kubectl expose
deployment hello-world-service-blue. That's going to be on port 4343, and it's
going to be of type ClusterIP. We'll do the same for the red service, but that port
is going to be 4242, and that's what we have here on line 78. So we have the two
deployments up and running and we have the two services up and running in our
cluster on unique ports. So let's check out the ingress for accessing those
services based on their path, and so we'll load up the file ingress-path.yaml
and walk through this code together. Now, inside of here let's skip down to the
spec for our path-based ingress. Inside there, we have ingressClassName
nginx, we've defined some rules for the host name, path.example.com. It's of type
http, and the paths are going to be /red, which is going to be pathType Prefix, and
that's going to send our traffic to the backend service hello-world-service-red on
the ClusterIP port 4242. We have a second path in this ingress that's going to be
available, /blue. Its pathType is going to be Exact, so the string has to be a case-
sensitive match to /blue for it to match to hit the backend service, and that
backend service is going to be hello-world-service-blue running on 4343. So let's
go ahead and jump over here and roll that out with kubectl apply and -f ingress-
path.yaml. We'll use kubectl get ingress again --watch so that we can keep track
of when our IP address is allocated so that we can access that ingress. And so in
the first line there we see our ingress ingress-path, its class is nginx and its host is
going to be path.example.com. It doesn't have an address yet, but it should pop
up here in a second. With our address populated, let's go ahead and break out of
the watch at the bottom and examine that ingress a little more closely with
kubectl describe ingress ingress-path. In the output at the bottom we see name
ingress-path, and it's in the default namespace. Now, in the manifest for this
ingress, we didn't define a default backend. So here you can see for Default
backend that where you'd normally see some Pod endpoints, you see endpoints
default-http-backend not found. And so anything that comes into this ingress
that doesn't match a path will get a 404 error. Well, we do have some rules, so
let's check out those rules. The hostname has to be path.example.com, and so
anything that comes in that wants to hit these paths is going to have to have that
host defined either as a host header or in the DNS name. We have two paths
defined in this ingress, /red and /blue, each routing to their respective
services, hello-world-service-red and hello-world-service-blue. Now remember,
we're not going to route to the services, we're going to send that traffic directly to
the Pod endpoints, and so there in the right in parentheses we can see the
respective Pod endpoints for each one of those services. So our ingress single
that we deployed earlier is still up and running and available, and so I just wanted
to run this code here to show you that. So there we see hello-world-service-
ingress-single if we just send traffic in on the bare IP and the bare node port. But
now for us to access our path-based routed ingresses, we need to define a host
header, and so I could either define a DNS name or I can specify the --header
parameter for curl, and so let's look at how we can do that on line 100 here. So I
want to access the /red path, and I need to make sure that we're injecting the
host header, and so on line 100 we're doing just that, and so let's walk through
this code together. So curl http://, the variable that we loaded for our ingress
node port IP address, and then the actual node port itself, /red is the path that
we want to access, --header allows us to inject a host header, and that's what we
have here, Host: path.example.com. And so when I run that code there, you can
see at the bottom Hostname: hello-world-service-red, so we got routed to the
correct service via our path-based ingress. If I want to access /blue I can use the
same technique and the same host header, since it is going to the same
ingress. And so when I run that code on line 101 to access the blue path, you can
see in the bottom hello-world-service-blue. Now let's check out some examples
of how that path type can influence what we can access and how we can access
it in the request that we send in. So in line 105 here I'm accessing our ingress, but
a path beyond just /red. So I have on this first line here I have /red/1, right,
because this is a prefix match, and so anything that's on /red is going to match
and get sent to the red service, and so there we can see at the bottom hello-
world-service-red. Let's go ahead and see another example of that sending traffic
into /red/2, and I get routed to the appropriate service for hello-world-service-
red. Now let's look at an example of Exact. Now all three of these examples are
going to yield a 404. First up, we know that Exact is case sensitive, so if I come in
on /blue, B instead of b is defined in our ingress, I'm going to get a 404. If I come
in on any other path, so like /blue/1, that's going to 404. If I do /blue/2, that's
going to 404 as well, because it's a case sensitive exact match on /blue. If we
don't define any path, but we do come in on path.example.com, what's going to
happen here? Well, we don't have a default backend defined in the ingress that
we defined together, so if I run this code here what's going to happen is I'm going
to get a 404, and that's not what we're going to want. When we deploy something
like an ingress, especially a path-based ingress, what we want to do is define a
default backend, so if somebody does come in on something that we haven't
defined, well, we can gracefully handle that situation and send the traffic
to something to reply back with maybe an error page or a redirect for
our customers for the services that they might want to access. And so let's go
ahead and deploy a default backend for our path-based ingress. And let's go
ahead and open up that code in the file ingress-path-backend.yaml. Now, the top
half of this ingress is identical to the one that we just deployed. All we did in this
path-based example is I added a default backend to the bottom here, sending
traffic to the service, hello-world-service-single. So let's hop back over here and
roll out this new ingress configuration. At the bottom you can see ingress-path
configured. And so now if I do a kubectl describe ingress-path, whereas before
for default backend it had an error saying that there were no backends defined,
here now we can see that's going to send traffic to the hello-world-service-single
service, and there in parentheses are the Pod endpoints that we'll be routed to.
And so let's retry hitting our path-based ingress now with our default backend
defined, and if I do a curl on the base URL this time, whereas before I got a 404,
here you can see it's going to send traffic to hello-world-service-single.
Demo: Using Name Based Virtual Hosts with Ingress
Now, for our next demo, let's look at name based virtual hosts, and so, let's open
up the manifest for this demo and that's going to be ingress-namebased.yaml.
Inside of here, let's jump down a little bit inside of the spec and look at the rules
that we have defined. And so we have on line 8, the host red.example.com of type
http, inside of paths it's going to be pathType Prefix, and the path is going to be a
forward slash, so any traffic coming into red.example.com will be sent to the
backend service hello-world-service-red, and we also have an example here at
the bottom with the same configuration for the host blue.example.com. Let's
jump back into our demo script here and roll this ingress out with kubectl apply -
f ingress-namebased.yaml, and at the bottom we see ingress-namebased
created. We'll do a kubectl get ingress --watch, we'll hang tight for a second and
wait for that IP address to get populated. The first line of output, we see ingress-
namebased, class is nginx, and the two hostnames that we're listening
on, red.example.com and blue.example.com. Now in a few moments here that IP
address will get populated, we'll break out of this watch, and kick off the demo.
Alright, with our IP address populated, let's break out of that watch and test
out our name based virtual hosts. So we're going to use that same technique as
we did a few minutes ago, we're going to inject a host header with the --header
parameter, and the hostname for our first example is going to be
red.example.com. So let's go ahead and run that code there, and we see Hello
World, and we're getting routed to the hello-world-service-red, as we can see in
the output in the hostname. We'll try that example again, but this time we're
going to go against the hostname blue.example.com, and here you can see
we're routed to the correct service, in the output at the bottom we see hello-
world-service-blue.
Demo: Using TLS Certificates with Ingress
Now for our final demonstration here, let's look at a TLS example. And so what
we'll do first in this example is generate a certificate. So on line 147, I have the
code to generate a self-signed certificate with the openssl command, and so let's
go ahead and run that code, and what that's going to do is generate a private
key, and also a certificate file for us to use. The second step of the process here is
to create a secret with that private key and the certificate, and that's what we're
doing here on line 152. Kubectl create secret, the type is tls, the name is tls-
secret; --key is going to point to the tls.key file, and --cert is going to point to tls.crt
file, the one that's generated by the command on line 147. We'll run that code
together, and that secret will be stored in our cluster. And so the next part of the
process is to create a TLS-based Ingress, and let's look at the code to do that. So
in this manifest, we'll jump down into the spec, we have our Ingress class
name, which is nginx, and in the tls section, we have our host:
tls.example.com, and we're going to reference the secret name, the one that we
just created together, tls-secret. And so inside of rules, we're going to define a
host, tls.example.com, the type is http. Inside of paths, we'll define a path of /
pathType: Prefix, so all requests coming in on all paths will get routed to the back
end service, hello-world-service-single running on port 80. And so let's run that
code to deploy our TLS-based Ingress. We'll do a kubectl get ingress --watch, and
wait for the IP address to get populated, and the Ingress controller to be
configured. And a few moments later, our IP address is populated, and so let's go
ahead and break out of that watch and proceed with testing access to our TLS-
based Ingress. So we've been testing against our HTTP-based Ingress. Now we
need to test against an HTTPS-based Ingress, because we're going to send traffic
to port 443, and that's going to be routed to a different NodePort port, and so
let's go ahead and investigate what that port is. Earlier in this demo, we saw that
we had two NodePort ports associated with our service, and so let's look at them
again, now that we've deployed a TLS-based Ingress. Now in the output here, we
can see that the NodePort port for our HTTP endpoint is 3273. We can see for 443
or for our TLS or HTTPS traffic that the NodePort port is 31591. And so let's get
that NodePort port and put that in an environment variable, and that's what we're
doing here on line 166. And we'll go ahead and echo that out to make sure that
we have the right value, and there we see 31591. So we want to send our HTTPS
traffic to that NodePort port to get access to our TLS-encrypted Ingress. Now we
have to tell curl a couple of things to make it test properly against that HTTPS
Ingress, because we have the expectation of appropriate DNS resolution. And so
let's walk through the parameters for curl so that we can appropriately test our
TLS-based Ingress. On line 168, I have curl https://tls.example.com. That's the host
name in the certificate that we just generated. Then we have colon, and we're
going to pass in the NodePort port for the HTTPS service. That's going to be
31591, and we have that stored in that environment variable there. Since we don't
have a DNS record for the hosting that we have in our certificate,
tls.example.com, we can use the --resolve parameter to tell curl that
tls.example.com resolves to our NodePort service IP address. And so that's what
we're doing here on line 169; --resolve, the host name tls.example.com:, and then
it's going to be the NodePort port 31591:, and then the IP address of the NodePort
service, 172.16.94.12. And so that is going to force the resolution of that address to
our NodePort IP address. Since it's a self-signed certificate, we have to add --
insecure so that we can trust the certificate that's presented to us, and I added
the --verbose parameter so that we can see the TLS negotiation. So let's highlight
all of this code and run it together, and at the bottom there, we can see we're
getting routed to hello-world-service-single, and in the output, you can see
the build-up and tear-down of our TLS-encrypted Ingress, and so that's what all
this output at the bottom is here. And so with that, that's a wrap for this demo. I
have a bunch of delete statements here to delete all of the resources that we
created together in this demonstration and also the certificate file. So let's go
ahead and run all that code to delete all of that. And we will also use kubectl
delete -f and specify our deployment manifest for our Ingress controller to delete
our Ingress controller too, if you want to do that, and that'll go ahead and get rid
of all the resources created inside that deployment manifest.
Module Review and Thank You!
Here we are at the end of our module. And to recap, we started off with an
overview of ingress and its architecture. We looked at the Kubernetes Ingress
object and how it's used to define access rules for applications running in our
cluster. And then we looked at the Ingress controller, which is used to implement
those rules. After that, we looked at a series of common use cases for Ingress,
exposing cluster services externally with techniques like path-based
routing, name-based virtual hosts, and TLS encryption. So here we are at the end
of our course. I really hope you enjoyed listening to this and that we've laid the
appropriate foundation for your Kubernetes networking studies. We've covered a
lot of ground together in this course, and we looked at Kubernetes networking
fundamentals and configuring and managing application access with both
services and Ingress. It's truly been a pleasure of recording this course, and
I thank you for listening and, most importantly, learning with me. Thank you. I
hope you enjoyed the course, and join me again soon, here at Pluralsight.