Managing Kubernetes Controllers and
Deployments
Course Overview
Course Overview
Hi everyone. My name is Anthony Nocentino, enterprise architect and founder of
Centino Systems. Welcome to my course, Managing Kubernetes Controllers and
Deployments. Are you a systems administrator or developer that needs to deploy
workloads in Kubernetes clusters? If you do, then this is the course for you. In this
course, we'll start our journey with an introduction to Kubernetes controllers. We'll
learn what controllers are and how they maintain the desired state for our
applications. Then we'll dive straight in and learn about the deployment
controller, the primary way to deploy applications in Kubernetes. We'll start off
with an introduction and the basics of using deployments, and then we'll dive
deep and learn how we can use deployments to maintain our applications. We'll
learn techniques on how to update, roll back, and scale our deployments in
Kubernetes. And to wrap it up, we'll look closely at some additional controllers in
Kubernetes, the DaemonSet job, CronJob, and StatefulSet. We'll learn what
scenarios we would want to use these controllers in, and how to create,
update, and manage applications deployed using these controllers. By the end of
this course, you'll have what it takes to roll out, maintain, and scale production
workloads in Kubernetes. Before beginning this course, you should be familiar
with the Linux operating system and administering it at the command line. You
should have a firm understanding of TCP/IP-based networking and
also understand the fundamental concepts of containers. You'll also need to
know the core concepts of Kubernetes, like what a cluster is and how to interact
with your cluster at the command line. I hope you'll join me on this journey to
learn how to deploy and manage workloads in Kubernetes in the course,
Managing Kubernetes Controllers and Deployments.
Using Controllers to Deploy Applications and
Deployment Basics
Introduction, Course and Module Overview
Hello. This is Anthony Nocentino with Centino Systems. Welcome to my course,
Managing Kubernetes Controllers and Deployments. In this module, we're going
to kick it off with a course introduction and then dive straight into the content
with an overview of controllers and then get started looking at the primary way to
deploy applications in Kubernetes with a deployment. Let's kick it off with a
course overview. In this molecule, we'll start our journey into looking at
controllers. We'll learn what controllers are, how they maintain the desired state
for our applications, and how they can be used to deploy applications in
Kubernetes. Then, we'll dive straight in and learn about the basic elements of
the deployment controller. This is the primary way to deploy applications in
Kubernetes. Then, in the next module, we'll look much more closely at the
deployment controller, and we'll see how we can use it to maintain
applications. We'll learn techniques on how to update, rollback, and scale our
deployments in Kubernetes. And then finally, in the last module, we'll look closely
at two additional controllers, the DaemonSet and the Job. We'll learn what
scenarios we'd want to use these in and how to create, update, and manage
applications deployed using these controllers. In this module, we will begin with
understanding the need for controllers in Kubernetes and how they're used to
deploy applications and maintain application state. We will look at the internals of
the controller manager and how it implements watch loops to determine the
status of the controller and control Pod deployments, keeping our applications in
the desired state. Next, we will introduce the core controllers, which are
Deployments, StatefulSets, DaemonSets, and Jobs. Then, we'll move into a basic
introduction of the Deployment controller, learning how to deploy applications in
Kubernetes. And finally, we will look at ReplicaSets, learning how they're used to
manage Pods and their state in our clusters.
Kubernetes Principals, the Controller Manager, and
Introduction to Controllers
Let's start off with the defining principles of Kubernetes, and first up is a desired
state with the declarative configuration. We define our application's deployment
state in code, defining what we want to deploy, and Kubernetes will make that
happen for us, pulling the specified container images and starting them up in
Pods. We write code describing this, and Kubernetes does the work to bring our
cluster into the desired state. Next up is controllers. Controllers are used to keep
your application or your deployment in the desired state, and this is the core
focus of this course. Controllers will monitor the current state of the cluster and, if
needed, make changes to get the cluster into the desired state. And then finally,
the API server. The API server is the core information hub inside of Kubernetes
This is where administrators interact with Kubernetes and where other parts of
the cluster, such as controllers, interact with the cluster to understand the
current state and to make changes to that state when needed. Looking more
closely at the control plane node, we see the API server, the cluster store, the
scheduler, and the controller manager. The controller manager function is
implemented and runs on the control plane node. It interacts with the API server
to ensure that we maintain the desired state that we define in our cluster. The
controller manager has the job of implementing the lifecycle function of
controllers, and we'll look at the different types of controllers and the resources
that they control throughout this module and the remainder of the
course. Looking more closely at the controller manager, there's two different
controller managers that'll support workloads and the desired state of your
applications in your cluster. And first up is the kube-controller-manager. The
kube-controller-manager is responsible for running the core controllers and
keeping the cluster in the desired state using control loops, which run on the
control plane node. And there's only one kube-controller-manager per
cluster. Many controllers run inside of the controller manager process, and here's
where you'll find the control loops executing and supported things like
deployments, replica sets, and service endpoints and other various controllers
used to support your workloads in your Kubernetes clusters. The second type of
controller manager is the cloud-controller-manager. These cloud-specific
controllers or control loops were originally implemented inside of the kube-
controller-manager, but this functionality was abstracted into cloud-specific
controller managers, enabling cloud providers to build controllers specific to their
resources in their environments. Moving this functionality into a dedicated
controller manager has allowed cloud vendors to evolve their code
independently from the core Kubernetes code and at their own pace. The cloud-
controller-manager runs controllers to interact with the underlying cloud
provider resources, so things like load balancers, network routes, and volume
controllers, essentially the physical infrastructure inside of your cloud provider. So
now that we know the controller manager runs controllers sometimes called
control loops on the control plane node, what exactly does a controller do? A
controller watches the state of the cluster through the API server and makes
changes to move the current state of the cluster into the desired state. And so,
for example, if I tell Kubernetes to instantiate a controller that runs four Pods on
a particular container image at all times in my cluster, well, Kubernetes will ensure
that four Pods are running at all times in the cluster if possible. Controllers use a
watch mechanism to be notified of changes to the resources that they're
monitoring, but also periodically poll for updated information when needed. We
introduced the watch functionality in my course, Managing the Kubernetes API
Server and Pods. Now, any operation that's needed to move the cluster into the
desired state will be generated by the controller and submitted to the API
server. The API server will handle the request and, if needed, persists the change
to etcd, moving the cluster from the current state to the desired state. Now it's
time to look more closely at the controllers that are available for us to build
workloads inside of Kubernetes, and we're going to organize those into two
buckets for today, controllers that control Pods and controllers that control
other resources inside of our Kubernetes clusters. Now, as for the controllers that
manage Pods, well, first up, is the ReplicaSet. The ReplicaSet deploys and
maintains a defined number of Pods from a Pod template. A Pod template is a
definition of what container image you want to run and its configuration. A
deployment allows for declarative updates of Pods and ReplicaSets, enabling you
to move between versions of container images and easily scale and manage your
applications. This is the core way to deploy applications inside of Kubernetes, and
we will spend a large portion of this course discussing creating, updating, and
managing deployments. The DaemonSet ensures that all or some nodes in a
cluster run a Pod. A primary example is the kube proxy for networking services
inside of your cluster. It's deployed as a DaemonSet and runs on each node in
your cluster. Other example workloads include log collectors and monitoring
agents. The StatefulSet allows for stateful applications to be managed by a
controller providing unique network names, persistent storage, and ordered
operations for scaling and also rolling updates. Now, the controllers so far
introduced start up a workload and run those workloads continuously remaining
in that running state. A Job is slightly different. A Job creates one or more Pods
and ensures that a defined number of them successfully terminate. This is
commonly used to instantiate and run batch workloads inside of your cluster. And
then finally, the CronJob. The CronJob creates and manages jobs based on a
defined schedule. This is the same type of job that we just introduced. Now, let's
look at some other controller types available to us inside of Kubernetes. First up is
the Node controller. The Node controller has the responsibility for monitoring the
state of the nodes in a cluster. Are they up? Are they down? What's the status of
the resources available on the nodes? Then, there's the Service controller, which
manages the creation and deletion of load balancers from infrastructure. Not
quite what you think in terms of managing services, but it manages the load
balancer itself rather than the service. Then there's the Endpoint controller, which
updates and manages service endpoints for Pods and services based on the
label selectors defined, basically which Pod IPs belong to which services defined
in the cluster. Now, there are many more controllers available to you inside of
Kubernetes, the Namespace controller, Route controller, Cloud controller,
PersistentVolume controller, and so on. But these are the core ones that we're
going to use to build applications inside our Kubernetes clusters throughout this
course and likely the core ones that you'll be using to build the core workloads
inside of your cluster.
Lab Environment Review
Before we kick off our first demonstration in this course, let's review the lab
environment. We initially constructed this lab in the course
Kubernetes Installation and Configuration Fundamentals. Now our virtual
machines are going to be the same. They're going to be Ubuntu 22.04, VMware
Fusion VMs with 2 vCPUs, 2 GB of RAM, and 100 GB of disk space with the swap
disabled, as required by the kubelet. For this lab, you can use any underlying
hypervisor that you want. I just so happen to be using VMware Fusion. Now, to
take DNS out of the equation in our lab, I have hostnames set for each server and
specified in a host file on each of the virtual machines in the lab. As for the virtual
machines that make up the lab, we're going to have one control plane node, c1-
cp1, where we'll be driving all of our demonstrations from. We'll SSH into c1-cp1
and use kubectl locally on that server. In addition to the control plane node, we're
going to have three nodes in our lab, c1-node1, c1-node2, and c1-node3, and
they're all going to be statically IP addressed with the addresses shown here on
the screen. Now, if you need help constructing this lab, head over to my
course, Kubernetes Installation and Configuration Fundamentals, and you'll get
bootstrapped with this configuration, I also want to call out that c1-cp1 used to be
called c1-master1 in this series of courses. We have since renamed it to c1-cp1
to keep up with current terminology in Kubernetes. So if you see c1-master1 in a
demo, know that it's functionally the same as c1-cp1.
Demo: Examining System Pods and Their Controllers
All right, so let's get into our first demo, and we're going to look at some
controllers that you probably already have up and running inside of your
cluster. We're going to examine your system Pods and the controllers that
support them. So here we are logged into c1-master1, which is the master node in
the cluster that we built that we're using in this series of courses on Kubernetes
at Pluralsight. Now, the first thing we're going to do is we're going to examine
some system Pods and their supporting controllers, and I want to start off kind of
from a discovery standpoint and ask Kubernetes, well, give me all of the
resources that you have available in the kube-system namespace. And to do that,
we use kubectl get --namespace kube-system all. And so here we go down the
line 10. Let's go ahead and run that code together. Now on the output here, we
see a collection of different resources that are up and running in our cluster. And
so let's go ahead and start at the top here. We see a collection of Pods
supporting various types of system functionality in our cluster. We see things like
the API server, the controller manager, and the kube-proxy. If we go down a little
bit further, we can see a collection of services that are up and running. We see
kube-dns and calico-typha. In our daemonaets, we see calico-node and kube-
proxy and some deployments that are up and running as well. We see a calico-
typha deployment and also a coredns deployment. And below those, we see the
replicasets that make up those deployments. So let's go ahead and get back to
the top here and go down a little bit further and look more closely at an
individual resource that's up and running. So here we see that we want to look
more closely at a deployment for coredns, and so we can ask Kubernetes for a
little bit more information. We can say kubectl get --namespace kube-system
deployments coredns. I run that code there, and we can see that there is the
output of the current status of our deployment. So our coredns deployment
requires that two Pods are up, and there are. There are two Pods that are up and
ready. Now that's going to be defined in the code that describes what we want
Kubernetes to do, in this case the coredns deployment requires that two Pods be
up and running, and that certainly is the case here. If we go down a little bit
further, we can do the same thing, but for DaemonSets this time. And so we can
ask Kubernetes, hey, kubectl get from the namespace kube-system the
information about the various DaemonSets that are available. So here we see we
have two different DaemonSets that are up and running, one for calico-node and
one for kube-proxy. Calico-node is part of our Pod network that we've been
using inside of our cluster and kube-proxy being the Pod supporting networking
inside of our Kubernetes cluster. Now, you might wonder, why are there four of
each one of these? Well, let's go a little bit further and ask Kubernetes for the
number of nodes. If you recall from the presentation portion of the course, a
DaemonSet has a responsibility on running one Pod on all the nodes in a cluster
or a subset of nodes in a cluster. In this case, we're running Pods on each node in
a cluster because we're supporting the networking that goes into our Kubernetes
cluster.
Introducing the Deployment Controller and Deployment
Basics
Now, let's start our journey looking more closely at a specific type of controller in
Kubernetes, the deployment. The deployment is used to provide declarative
updates to ReplicaSets and their constituent Pods. We define the state of our
deployment, and the deployment controller will move us towards that desired
state. The deployment controller provides the orchestration for things like Pod
creation and deletion, again, driving us towards the state that we define in our
deployment. We can also use the deployment controller to maintain the state of
our application over time, rolling out new versions of our application or rolling
back using a defined update strategy that we can configure inside of our
deployment's definition. We can also leverage deployments to scale up or scale
down our applications either with manual intervention or automatically scaling
those Pods for us. So in terms of managing application state with deployments
inside of Kubernetes, we're going to focus on three primary operations, creating,
updating, and scaling. In this module, we're going to focus on creating basic
deployments. In the module Maintaining Applications with Deployments, we'll
look more closely at updating deployments and controlling the rollout of those
updates, as well as scaling our deployments. And so now, let's look more closely
at what it takes to define a deployment in Kubernetes. The preferred way to
manage workloads in Kubernetes is declaratively where we define our objects in
code, most likely YAML, and give that to the API server to process and create
those resources for us. In deployments, we'll write a deployment spec in
YAML. And in that spec, it'll consist of several parts. And first up is the
selector. The selector is used for determining which Pods belong to the
deployment. The number of replicas or the number of Pods to create in
a deployment is the next required element. And then, there's the Pod
template. The Pod template defines the technical details for our container-based
applications. These are the Pods that will be created by the ReplicaSets that
support this deployment. If you want to dig into the details of a Pod definition, go
ahead and check out my course Managing the Kubernetes API Server and
Pods. Now, another way to create and configure deployments is imperatively at
the command line. An imperative configuration will execute a sequence of
commands to get our system in the state that we want it to be in. This is not the
preferred way for managing deployments, but a useful way to quickly get
operations completed. And so here, we can see kubectl create deployment hello-
world, and hello-world is the name of the deployment that we're going to
create. We also add in the --image parameter with the path to the actual
container image that we run a run inside of this particular deployment. This
command here will create a deployment with exactly one replica in i, running the
hello-app container image. If you wanted to scale this deployment with an
imperative command, we can use kubectl scale deployment hello-world, which is
the name of the deployment, and then pass in the parameter --replicas=5. This
will create four additional Pods in the deployment for a total of 5 replicas, driving
the cluster from the current state to the desired state. So now we have the core
concepts of deployments under our belt, let's look at how we actually write the
code or the YAML to deploy a deployment inside of Kubernetes. And much like
any other resource in Kubernetes, we start off with an apiVersion, a kind, a
metadata, and the spec. And so let's walk through these elements before we
jump into the spec. The apiVersion is going to be apps/v1. The kind is going to be
Deployment. And of course, for metadata, we're going to give it a name. In this
case, is going to be hello-world. Now in the spec, this is going to be the technical
implementation details of the object, of the deployment. So the first thing that
we're going to need is the number of replicas that we want to have up and
running. And so, in this workload, we're going to have five, but this is going to be
whatever it takes to run your container-based application. Next, we define a
selector for determining membership, like which Pods belong to this
deployment. In this case, we're going to use matchLabels as our selector type. We
have the option of using matchLabels or matchExpressions. Here, we're going to
use matchLabels. We'll discuss matchExpressions later on into this module. Our
key and our value are going to be app and hello-world. And here we see the start
of the Pod template. This is the core part of our deployment, or this is the
template that's going to be used to create the Pods that are a member of this
deployment. And so the first thing that we need to define is the metadata and
the labels associated with these Pods. In this case, it's going to have to be app
equals hello-world because we want this to match the selector inside of our
deployment spec here at the top. Now, inside the Pod template, we're going to
have a second spec, but this is going to be for the Pod template itself, and so
we'll have the containers and the container configuration inside this portion of
the Pod template. And so these are the core elements that you need to build a
deployment inside of Kubernetes. It's going to be the replicas, the selector, and
the Pod template. Now we take all this information, we save it into a file, and we
use kubectl apply -f and ship that into the API server for creation. So now that we
have the core concepts of deployments under our belt and we looked at the
code that it takes to create a deployment, let's get a visualization of what occurs
when we ask Kubernetes to create a deployment for us. And so, we're going to
look at this from the cluster level. And let's say we come along and we ask
Kubernetes to make a deployment for us. Well, the first thing that that's going to
do is create a ReplicaSet, and the ReplicaSet has the responsibility of
instantiating the number of replicas defined in the deployment spec. And
now, there's one other piece of the puzzle to get users access into
these container-based applications that are running inside of these Pods. We'll
have to front end our deployment with a service. And so in this case here, we're
going to define an HTTP service for access into these Pod-based
applications. Now, not required for deployment, but we certainly want to be able
to have people access the resources that we're exposing in a deployment. And so
this is what it looks like when we've rolled out applications inside of
Kubernetes. We combine the service for access and the deployment for
managing our application state.
Demo: Creating a Basic Deployment Imperatively and
Declaratively
Let's get into another demo and look at how we can create deployments, both
imperatively and declaratively. All right, so here we are logged into c1-cp1, and
let's get started with creating a deployment imperatively with kubectl create. Now
when working with kubectl create, you have a lot of parameters available to you
to specify the image, the container ports, and number of replicas. We're going to
do a basic command here on line 8 where we just specify the only required
parameter, which is a container image. And so on line 8, we have kubectl create
deployment and then the deployment name hello-world and then the parameter
--image to tell the deployment which container image to use. And here we're
using our hello-app application from the Google Container Registry. Now when I
run that code, that's going to create a deployment. In the output here, we see
deployment.apps/hello-world created. That deployment will create a
ReplicaSet, which will create exactly one Pod since we didn't specify the
number of replicas on the command line here on line 8. Now we can scale this
deployment by using the command on line 9, kubectl scale deployment hello-
world --replicas=5, and I will create the four additional replicas bringing us to the
desired state of 5. And so in the input at the bottom, we see deployment.apps/
hello-world scaled. Now I do want to call out, again just to give you an
example, that we can combine those parameters together. And so line 13, I have
an example of that for you where I specify both the image parameter and a
replicas parameter. Check out the --help options to dig into the available
parameters for you to use when using kubectl create deployment. Now if I do
kubectl get deployment, we'll see that our deployment is available to us. And so
in the output, we have hello-world as the deployment name. We have READY 5 of
5, so 5 replicas are up, running and ready. Now the output here, READY, UP-TO-
DATE, and AVAILABLE, describes kind of the various states of a deployment. Now,
right now, we're going to focus on the fact that just five replicas are up and
running. And later on in this module, and then in the rest of the course, we're
going to dig into what each of these columns means. So that's our imperative
deployment. Let's go ahead and delete that imperative deployment and move
on to the second part of the demonstration where we're going to create a
deployment declaratively. Now, on line 29, I have the command kubectl apply -f
deployment.yaml. Let's dig into that actual deployment file, which I have
available to us here. So this is the same deployment that we walked through
in the presentation portion of the course where we've defined our apiVersion as
apps/v1, our kind as deployment, and the metadata, or the name of the
deployment, is hello-world. Now, in the deployment spec, scroll down a little bit
here. On line 6, we have replicas equals 5. On line 7, we have the selector, which is
of type matchLabels. And there, the key and the value are app and hello-
world. Inside the Pod template, we have the metadata associated with each Pod
that will be created by this deployment defining the labels app hello-world that
matches the selector into the deployment spec above. Now, in the Pod template
spec, we're saying we're going to launch this one container named hello-
world. And again, we're going to be using our hello-app container from the
Google Container Registry. I also have in here a service that's going to be created
with our deployment as part of this deployment that we're creating together. So
let's jump back to our driver script and run the code on line 29 together. And at
the bottom, we see both resources are created. We see deployment.apps/hello-
world created and service/hello-world created. And so now, let's check out the
status of that deployment that we just created declaratively. Do a kubectl get
deployments, define a deployment named hello-world. In the output at the
bottom, you see the name hello-world and that 5 of 5 replicas are up, running
and ready. Now, it's the responsibility of the deployment to create a ReplicaSet,
and let's look at the ReplicaSet that was created by this deployment. And so let's
do a kubectl get replicasets. And in the output at the bottom, we see the name of
the ReplicaSet, hello-world, which also matches the deployment name. Next to
that in the ReplicaSet name, we see the Pod template hash, 54575d5b77. And so
that's a hash actually of the Pod template spec. Now this ReplicaSet has the
responsibility of starting up and keeping five Pods online. And so there we see
the various states of the ReplicaSet, that 5 are desired, the 5 are current, and that
5 are ready. And so let's look more closely at those Pods that were created by
that ReplicaSet. We can do that with kubectl get pods. And so there we see the
five Pods associated with that ReplicaSet, and we can kind of decipher that from
the name of the Pod that's running. So let's kind of break that apart there. So the
first part, we see hello-world, which is the name of the deployment. Then we see
the Pod template hash in the middle there ending in b77 and then a unique
identifier attached to the end. And so just visually, we can see real quickly that
we can make a determination that these Pods belong to that deployment on that
ReplicaSet. But if you want to see this from another angle, we can use kubectl
describe pods to help us see that. And so each Pod will also have a field in its
output that tells you which controller is controlling that Pod. And at the bottom
there, we can see that this Pod is controlled by the ReplicaSet hello-world with
the Pod template hash ending in b77. Now, so far in this demo, we've created a
deployment imperatively, and we looked at the relationship of the deployment
with the ReplicaSet and the Pods. Let's take a really close look at the deployment
itself with kubectl describe deployment. We'll run that code and scroll up in the
output here. So in the output, we see the name is hello-world. We see the
selector app=hello-world. And that's how the deployment is able to determine
which Pods are a member of this deployment. Now we see the number of replicas
associated with this particular deployment in various states. We see 5 desired, 5
updated, 5 total, 5 available, and 0 unavailable. We're going to dive deep into
each one of those states later on in the course. Scrolling down in the output
here, we see the Pod template. So each Pod that is created from this deployment
will look like this. So there we see the labels associated with the Pod and
the containers defined in this Pod template. Scrolling down a little bit further in
the output in the events, we can see ScalingReplicaSet and from deployment-
controller. So it was the responsibility of the deployment-controller to scale that
ReplicaSet up. So in the message on the right there, we see Scaled up replica set
hello-world then the Pod template hash ending in b77 to 5, or 5 replicas. And so it
was the responsibility of this deployment to create the ReplicaSet, and then it's
the responsibility of the ReplicaSet to create the Pods associated with the
deployment. And so that's a wrap for this demo. Let's go ahead and clean up our
resources with kubectl delete deployment hello-world and kubectl delete service
hello-world.
Understanding ReplicaSet Controller Operations
So far in this course, we've learned that deployments are made of ReplicaSets
and learned how deployments create ReplicaSets automatically for us based
on what's defined in the deployment spec. Now, let's take some time to zoom in
on what a ReplicaSet is and how it functions. A ReplicaSet deploys a defined
number of Pods in a cluster and ensures that that number of Pods are always
online and ready inside of a cluster. A ReplicaSet consists of a selector, which
determines what Pods are a member of the ReplicaSet, a defined number of
replicas to start, and also a Pod template. So in the example deployment that we
just walked through, we had to define all three of these elements inside of the
deployment spec since the deployment will create our ReplicaSets for us. Now,
generally speaking, you don't create ReplicaSets directly. You create
deployments, which then create the ReplicaSets for you. But in this part of the
module, we will create a few ReplicaSets directly so that you can see how they're
built and how they operate. But the main idea here is to examine the behavior of
a ReplicaSet, knowing that it's the underlying building block of a
deployment. Let's get a visualization of the core operations of a ReplicaSet in a
Kubernetes cluster. And so let's say we have a cluster and we declare a
ReplicaSet of four Pods, and the selector for this ReplicaSet is going to look for
the R1 label on the Pods to determine who is a member of this ReplicaSet. Now,
let's say something comes along and interrupts access to one of these
Pods. Maybe the application crashed. Maybe the node died. Maybe the Pod was
terminated. For whatever reason, that Pod is no longer available in the cluster. It's
the responsibility of the ReplicaSet controller to sense that this has occurred and
that the cluster has deviated from the desired state. It's able to determine this
because the number of replicas running in the cluster that match the selector is
only three, and the desired number of replicas is four. And so the ReplicaSet
controller will kill off that failed Pod and delete it and send a creation request into
the API server to create a new Pod in the cluster, making sure that we stay in the
desired state of four replicas for this ReplicaSet. Now, later, let's say
administratively we come along, and we remove a label from a Pod that was the
selector for this ReplicaSet. Now, what's the ReplicaSet controller going to do
here? Well, that Pod no longer satisfies the selector for the ReplicaSet, and the
ReplicaSet controller sees that there are only three Pods supporting the
ReplicaSet. And so what it's going to do is it's going to remove that Pod from
the ReplicaSet and create a new Pod in the ReplicaSet to get us back into
that define desired state of four Pods for this ReplicaSet. Let's look at what it
takes to build a ReplicaSet in YAML. Now I do want to call out that you'll very
rarely want to create ReplicaSets directly. You'll want to create deployments,
which create ReplicaSets for you. But I want to show this to you so you have the
skill in your toolbelt if needed. First up, we define an apiVersion, which is going to
be apps/v1. And we're going to have a kind, which is going to be a
ReplicaSet. That's the object that we're trying to create here. Jumping right into
the spec, we see that we have a defined number of replicas, in this case 1. We'll
define a selector for determining Pod membership. In this case, we use the
matchLabels selector type and a key and value pair of app and hello-world-
pod. Now we begin the Pod template, and the metadata for that will have the
labels associated with the Pod the ReplicaSet creates. In this case, it's going to
be app and hello-world-pod. These will have to match for determining which
Pods are a member of this particular ReplicaSet. Inside of the Pod template, we'll
have a second spec, which is the Pod template spec. Inside of there, we'll have
the container definition with regards to things like the image and the networking
configuration and other Pod-specific configurations. The three required elements
of a ReplicaSet are the Pod template, the number of replicas, and a selector. Let's
take a closer look at ReplicaSet selectors. ReplicaSet selectors allow for more
complex set-based selectors. In ReplicaSets, we can use both matchLabels, which
we've seen in our example so far, and also matchExpressions. MatchExpressions
is a selector that will allow you to use operators, such as In, NotIn, Exists, and
DoesNotExist, when looking at the label's keys and values for a particular Pod
resource. Using matchExpressions, you can build more complex representations
of your application state inside of Kubernetes. So let's take a look at the code
required to use a matchExpression as a ReplicaSet selector. So the code we have
up here now shows a selector that we defined before in a previous example using
a matchLabel selector with the key of app and a value of hello-world-pod. Now to
use matchExpressions as a selector, it's going to look kind of similar, but we're
going to obviously change the code around matchSelector. And so let's go ahead
and walk through that code now. So we'll start off with apiVersion, kind, metadata,
and spec, defining the number of replicas here. We have 1. Then, in the selector
section, we'll define matchExpressions. So notice the difference there. On the left,
we're using matchLabels. On the right, we're using matchExpressions. Then, we
define the key that we're going to use, which is going to be app. The operator is
going to be In. And the value that we're going to be looking for is hello-world-
pod-me. Now with that, the matchExpression is going to say does the key app
have the value hello-world-pod-me in the set of values in that particular
key? Now the remainder of the ReplicaSet is going to look familiar to you. So it's
going to be a Pod template defining the metadata, labels. And, of course, for the
Pods that get stamped out by this particular Pod template for this
ReplicaSet, we'll need the labels so that they have something that matches. In
this case, it does. And the spec and then finally the remainder of the technical
details for that container-based application in this Pod. So here, these two are
actually logically equivalent. On the left, we have the matchLabels where it's key
and the value of app and hello-world-pod. On the right, we have app hello-world-
pod-me. And so logically, they'll do the same thing. It's this individual label and
that set of values for the matchExpression. Let's discuss how ReplicaSets handle
failures inside of Kubernetes. If a Pod dies or perhaps it's accidentally deleted, it's
the responsibility of the ReplicaSet controller to submit a new Pod to be created
to the API server to ensure that the desire number of Pods are up and
running. Now, if there's a node failure, there's two different scenarios that we
need to look at, transient failures and permanent failures. In a transient
failure, perhaps there was a networking issue that caused a node to
become unreachable for a short period of time or even a node is rebooted
and crashed and quickly restarted and is back up and ready again. If these
events happen, the Pods on that node will be marked with an error status on the
API server because the controller manager cannot reach those Pods to get their
actual status. Now, if a node comes back online and the Pods on that node aren't
running, the container restart policy applies, and the kubelet restarts the
containers inside of those Pods on that node, and that's because those Pods are
still scheduled on that node in the cluster. Now, what happens if we lose a node
for good? We need a way to tell Kubernetes to give up on those Pods after some
extended period of time. And on the kube-controller-manager, there's the pod-
eviction-timeout setting, which defaults to 5 minutes. After 5 minutes, those Pods
that were on that node will be marked for termination on the API server, and new
Pods will be created by the replicas of controller in the cluster to ensure that
we're in the desired state for our ReplicaSet. Now, let's take a side note and
examine replication controllers. If you're cruising the web and you come across
some legacy documentation or code samples, you might see an API object of
ReplicationController. A ReplicationController is the predecessor to a ReplicaSet
with the key difference being that a ReplicationController can have only a
single label or key value pair used for determining Pod membership to
that particular ReplicationController. Now, a ReplicaSet, as we discussed in this
module, allows for more expressive representations of state with set-based
selectors using matchExpressions. And now, as we've discussed, we won't be
deploying ReplicaSets directly. We will want to use the higher-level construct
deployments to manage the ReplicaSets for us.
Demo: Creating a Deployment and ReplicaSet Controller
Operations
So here we are in our demo. And for demoing ReplicaSets, I'm actually going to
create a deployment first, which is, of course, going to create a ReplicaSet for
us. And then within that, we'll work through some various ReplicaSet demos. And
we'll start off with deleting a Pod in a ReplicaSet, isolating the Pod from a
ReplicaSet by changing its label, and then reclaiming that Pod or taking over that
Pod to bring it back into the ReplicaSet by adjusting its label again. Then we'll
also look closely at some node failures, both transient and permanent. Let's get
started. So here we are logged into c1-master1. And the very first thing that we're
going to do here is create a deployment, which is then going to create a
ReplicaSet for us. And so on line 7 here, we see kubectl apply -f
deployment.yaml. Let's go and take a quick peek at this deployment.yaml, and it's
the one that we've been using so far in the course, our simple hello-world
deployment kicking off five replicas. And this particular deployment is going to
use a matchLabels selector of app and hello-world. Down in the Pod template, we
can see the labels being applied and the subsequent spec for the containers
inside of this particular Pod. We have a service also defined at the bottom of this
deployment.yaml file. So let's jump back over, run that code, and there we can
see deployment.apps/hello-world created and also the service created. Now, that
deployment has the responsibility of instantiating a ReplicaSet based on the
number of replicas, the Pod template, and the label selector defined. So let's go
ahead and look at what it created for us. So here we can see the deployment
created a ReplicaSet, so hello-world-5646fcc96b with the desired number of our
replicas up and running, 5. Now, if we get a little bit further and use my favorite
command in Kubernetes, describe, we're going to say kubectl describe replicaset
hello-world. And that's going to give us the deep-dive information about
the ReplicaSet that that deployment just created for us. So let's go ahead and
scroll back to the top here and see what it has. So here we can see the name
hello-world and then the Pod template hash. It's in the default namespace, and
there's the selector. So we see app=hello-world, which is part of the matchLabels
and the label selector that was applied and then also the Pod template hash for
determining membership to that particular deployment managing this
ReplicaSet. We'll learn much more about the Pod template hash in the next
module. But for now, know that it's used to uniquely identify ReplicaSets within a
deployment since a deployment could have multiple ReplicaSets associated with
it. If we go down a little bit further, we can see that this ReplicaSet is controlled
by the deployment hello-world and that five replicas are up and running. Inside
of the Pod template, we can see the labels that are being applied to the Pods
that are created by this ReplicaSet and also the container definition. And at the
bottom here, we can see in the event that the ReplicaSet controller had the
responsibility of creating five Pods, and there we can see five successful Pod
creations at the bottom there. Now, let's go ahead and delete this particular
deployment with kubectl delete deployment hello-world. That's going to go
ahead and delete that for us and also delete the subsequent ReplicaSets. So
here, we can see if I do kubectl get geplicaset, that when we delete the
deployment, it also deletes the owned or the controlled ReplicaSet. There we see
No resources found. Now, I'm going to go ahead and recreate that ReplicaSet, but
using a matchExpression. So let's go ahead and look at the code for that here
in deployment-me.yaml. So it starts off just like any other deployment,
so apiVersion apps/v1, kind deployment, metadata giving it a name. And then
inside of the spec, we see five replicas. There we see a selector, but here's a key
difference from the previous deployment is that we're going to be using the
matchExpressions selector. Here, we see that the key is app, the operator is In,
and the values that we're going to be looking for, hello-world-pod-me. Let's go
down a little bit further and look at the Pod template, and there we see in the
metadata the labels that we're going to be using for this particular Pod template,
app hello-world me. So that's going to be what our ReplicaSet will stamp out for
us when it creates the Pods required. The remainder of this deployment looks just
like the other one where we're defining the spec for this particular Pod with
its containers and also creating a service. And so let's jump back over to our
demo script and use kubectl apply -f deployment-me.yaml to create that
matchExpressions-based deployment. Then, check on the status of that
ReplicaSet that it created, and here we can see it created a new ReplicaSet,
hello-world-f597dc95. And there we can see the desired number of replicas is up
and running, 5. Now let's go ahead and use that kubectl describe command for
the replicaset hello-world. It's going to run that code. If we scroll back to the top
here, I do want to point out a key difference between the two different types
of ReplicaSets based on the two different types of selectors,
matchExpressions versus matchLabels. There, we can see in the selector app
in (hello-world-pod-me), and then the Pod template hash. So you can see that
the representation of the selector is slightly different where before, when we
were using a matchLabels, it was using equality. And when we use the
matchExpression, it's going to use the operation, and, in this case, it's going to
be In. Now let's go ahead and move forward in this demo. We're going to keep this
ReplicaSet and deployment alive. We're going to do some other things with these
particular Pods. And the first thing we're going to do is actually delete a Pod and
see how Kubernetes reacts when we administratively delete a Pod inside of a
ReplicaSet. And so let's go ahead and grab this code and throw it in our clipboard,
so kubectl delete pods hello-world-. Go ahead and throw that down at the
bottom here and leverage tab completion to finish that for us. Let's go and grab
that first Pod in the list there. So, what we're going to do here is delete an
individual Pod and see what Kubernetes does for us, so kubectl delete pods
hello-world, there's the Pod template hash f597dc95- and then the Pod
identifier 4m6n4. Let's go ahead and run that code and see what happens.
Now with that finished, let's go ahead and run kubectl get pods again and see
what Kubernetes did. So we deleted that individual Pod. But if you look right
there in the middle of that output in the Pod ending with drrnj, we see that its
runtime is only about 11 seconds. So, as soon as we deleted that Pod, Kubernetes
and the ReplicaSet controller was like, wait a second. You told me to have five
replicas up and running at all times. Here's a new Pod and creates that new Pod
in our cluster for us.
Demo: ReplicaSet Controller Operations - Working with
Labels and Selectors
Let's go ahead and keep moving forward. Now, we're going to go ahead and
isolate a Pod from a ReplicaSet by changing its labels, and I covered this in great
detail in my previous course, Managing the Kubernetes API Server and Pods, in
module 2 if you want to get into much more detail about that. But here, we're
going to keep this to the context of ReplicaSets and deployments. But like I said,
if you want more detail, go ahead and check out that module in that
course. So, let's ask Kubernetes to give us a listing of all of our Pods and their
labels. So here we see the collection of five Pods that belongs to this
ReplicaSet, and there's two labels that are being applied, app=hello-world-pod-
me and then the Pod template hash f597dc95. Now, I'm going to go ahead and
change one of these Pod's labels. And so let's go and grab this code here, throw
this at the bottom, and leverage auto complete again to grab an individual Pod,
so we'll grab the first one on the list here. And so what we're saying here is
kubectl label pod, and we're going to label this individual Pod ending in
66fxt. Let's go and change that from app=hello-world-hello-world-pod-me
to app=DEBUG and see what Kubernetes is going to do for us. And to do that,
we'll go ahead and put that at the bottom here. We're going to label app=DEBUG
and --overwrite. Let's go ahead and run that code there and see what Kubernetes
does. If we run kubectl get pods with --show-labels again, we can see that we got
a sixth Pod because the ReplicaSet is looking for a selector for anyone with the
label of app=hello-world-pod-me. That new Pod was created just 5 seconds
ago, but at the top of the list there we see app=DEBUG. And so that Pod is still up
at alive. So this is a valuable technique to isolate a Pod for troubleshooting in the
event that you want to keep it alive, maybe to gather some logs or some runtime
information inside of the individual executing Pod. I do want to call out that in
this scenario, the ReplicaSet has the responsibility of ensuring that five Pods are
up and running at all times and within the selector defined in this ReplicaSet. So
we have five that are within the ReplicaSet selector and one that is not. So let's
go ahead and keep marching forward, and let's see if we could reclaim that Pod
and bring it back into the ReplicaSet now, and we'll also see how Kubernetes
reacts when we make this change. So I'm going to use the up arrow to bring back
this command here, and I'm going to change app=DEBUG in this
labelling command to app=hello-world-pod-me. Let's go ahead and apply that
command. Go down a little bit further and run kubectl get pods --show-labels and
see what Kubernetes did. What it did was it killed off one of those Pods. So now
we see we have five Pods up and running, whereas before we had six, and one of
those had app=DEBUG as the label. So we relabeled that Pod ending in 66fxt that
stays in a ReplicaSet, and Kubernetes picks off Pod in the ReplicaSet to
terminate, reducing the set of running Pods from six to five. And so if we look at
the ReplicaSet events using kubectl describe replicasets, let's run that code here,
and we can see at the bottom here, we can see the events that Kubernetes went
through when it created and deleted the various Pods, so the five initial Pods
being created. When we relabeled that Pod, it created a new one. And then when
we relabeled it back to the original, so we put it back into the selector, then it
deleted that extra Pod. And so there we can see the events that have occurred,
all driven by the ReplicaSet controller.
Demo: ReplicaSet Controller Operations - Node Failures
So let's clear our console and start off fresh and move into the next demo where
we're going to examine some node failures in ReplicaSets inside of our
cluster. And so, the first thing we're going to do here is log in to c1-node3 and
go ahead and initiate a command to shut it down. So we'll say sudo shutdown -h
now, and that's going to shut down this node in the cluster. So we'll go ahead and
move forward, and we're going to use the kubectl get nodes command with
a watch to monitor the status of that node. And so here, we can see all the nodes
are still reporting the status for Ready. But in about a minute, c1-node3 will switch
from the status of Ready to NotReady. Now we're going to go ahead and move
the video forward a little bit, so you'll have to wait this entire minute for that state
change. All right, so there we see c1-node3 in NotReady. So that status has
changed. And now, let's go ahead and move forward and see what
Kubernetes does with the Pods that were on c1-node3. So let's go ahead and
issue a command, kubectl get pods -o wide. And when we use -o wide, we'll see
in the Pod listing the node that each Pod is running on. So in the node column
there, we can see c1-node3 and that the Pod ending in fcs8z is still up and
running. Well, that's weird, but not really because Kubernetes is making the
assumption right now that this is a transient error and that Pod is still okay until it
knows when it has to give up, and we'll discuss that scenario momentarily. So let's
go ahead and bring c1-node3 back online, and I'm going to do that off screen
here, and we'll initiate the same command that we did a second ago, kubectl get
nodes --watch and watch for that status change. So here, c1-node3 is still
NotReady, and momentarily it should shift from NotReady to Ready. Now, keep in
mind, we shut down c1-node3. So the workload that was running on there, those
containers were stopped because, well, the server was stopped. Now let's watch
and see what happens when c1-node3 comes back online. So there's c1-node3 is
Ready, so let's go ahead and break out of the watch and check the status of our
Pods. Let's go ahead and run the same command we did a second ago, so kubectl
get pods -o wide, and there we can see that same Pod that was scheduled to c1-
node3 still exists. It's the same Pod, fcs8z, but its status is currently Error. Now,
because that Pod is still scheduled there, the kubelet on c1-node3 has the
responsibility of restarting that container inside of that Pod, and let's go see if it
did that work for us. And so now, by the time I went back and asked kubectl get
pods to give me that listing again, we can see in the output here at the bottom, let
me go ahead and break out of this watch, we can see at the output at the
bottom there that fcs8z certainly did have a single restart because, in the
RESTARTS column there, we see 1. And so let's go ahead and review what
happened here. We shut down c1-node3, so certainly the workload on c1-node3
would stop. But the API server still left that Pod alone on c1-node3, and it was the
responsibility of the kubelet when c1-node3 came back on and reported the
status of Ready to start the containers in that Pod back up again on c1-
node3. And so that then means that that Pod is back up and in the status of
Running, and it increments the restart counter as we see there. Now that was a
transient failure. Let's shift gears and talk about a more permanent failure, and so
let's go ahead and do that now. So, I'm going to go ahead and log in to c1-node3
again. I'm going to initiate another shutdown. But this time, rather than bringing
the node right back online, we're going to wait a little bit. We're going to wait
about 5 minutes to see what Kubernetes will do. Now, if you remember during the
presentation portion of the course, we differentiated between a transient failure
and a permanent failure. And so Kubernetes, when we do a transient failure, will
rely on the kubelet to restart the containers. Now, if I turn off this particular server
for an extended period of time, how is Kubernetes going to react? Well, we
discussed that. We talked about Pod eviction timeout, and that's a setting on the
kube-controller-manager. So after about 5 minutes, this Pod will be destroyed or
terminated from c1-node3 and recreated where the ReplicaSet will have the
responsibility of recreating a new Pod inside of the cluster to bring us back to
that 5 number of replicas and get us back to that desired state in our cluster. So
let's go ahead and run a watch here and see what happens after about 5
minutes. And so we're going to pause and move the video forward about 5
minutes so that you don't have to wait for this transaction to occur. But right now,
we see that there are five Pods up and running. So let's go ahead and pause and
move forward. All right, so after about 5 minutes, we can see our watch here is
going to report some interesting status to us. So let's go ahead and break out of
here and look at what Kubernetes did. So, we initiated a kubectl get pods --watch
to watch the status of what was occurring when we shut down c1-node3. And so
here we can see that the Pod that was scheduled on c1-node3, which was fcs8z,
went from the status of Running to Terminating, which means it's going to be
shut down by the cluster. That Pod is going to be destroyed. And then we see
Kubernetes reacts and kicks out the creation of a new Pod. So there we see mttxp
go from Pending to ContainerCreating to Running. Let's go ahead and run the
code to see where that Pod landed in the cluster, and so we can do a kubectl get
pods -o wide, run that code, and we can see mttxp has a status of Running and is
now running on c1-node3. So we do have five up-and-running Pods, and we still
have one that's still in the status of Terminating. So let's go ahead and clean up
and use kubectl delete the deployment, which is going to delete the ReplicaSet
supporting this deployment, and we'll go ahead and clean up and delete the
service. And before we move on, let's go ahead and make sure that we start up
c1-node3 again for the remainder of our demos.
Module Review and What's Next!
So let's revisit this topic in a more formal context. Should use ReplicaSets or
should you use deployments? You should use deployments. Deployments will
manage ReplicaSets for you. They manage to creation, moving between versions
of ReplicaSets, and also scaling. We'll learn much more about these advanced
techniques in the upcoming module, Deploying and Maintaining Applications
with Deployments. Now, ReplicaSets are the core building blocks of deployments,
and that's why I spent so much time in this module discussing how to create
it, how selectors work, and how ReplicaSets respond to failures. So, here we are at
the end of the module, and we certainly covered a lot. We began with some
theory and introducing controllers, how they work, and discussing the types of
controllers that are available for us to build workloads inside of Kubernetes
Then, in the second part of the module, we started our journey looking more
closely at the basics of the deployment controller and its core building block,
ReplicaSets. Well, that's a wrap for this module. Join me in the next module,
Deploying and Maintaining Applications with Deployments.
Maintaining Applications with Deployments
Introduction, Course and Module Overview
Hello. This is Anthony Nocentino with Centino Systems. Welcome to my course,
Managing Kubernetes Controllers and Deployments. This module is Deploying
and Maintaining Applications with Deployments. In this module, we're going to
look very closely at maintaining our application state with deployments. So far in
this course, we introduced the concepts behind controllers and looked at our first
controller, the deployment, and its basic use cases. Now, let's dig in a little bit
further and learn how we can use deployments to maintain our application state
in the module Maintaining Applications with Deployments. In this module, we're
going to learn how we can use deployments to configure and manage our
application state, and we're going to cover three big topics. And first, we're going
to look at updating our applications using deployments where we can specify
things like a new container image that needs to be rolled out into our
cluster. Then, when we trigger an update, we'll need a way to control the rollout
of that new version of that application as Kubernetes deploys new Pods and
removes old Pods, and so we'll spend some time discussing how we can control
rollouts. And then we'll look at how we can scale our application, both up
and down, so we can increase or decrease the number of Pods supporting our
workloads.
Updating a Deployment and Checking Deployment
Rollout Status
And so, when it comes to managing our application state with deployments, we
discussed creating deployments in the module Using Controllers to Deploy
Applications and Deployment Basics. In this module, we're going to focus on
updating deployments and also scaling deployments. Now, let's say our
developers create a new version of our application and push that container-
based application into a container registry, and now it's time to roll that out into
our Kubernetes cluster. We can use a deployment to roll out new Pods using
that new version of our container image, and the deployment will manage the
transition between the two sets of Pods, the original set of Pods on the old
version and a new set of Pods on a new version. And when it's finished, will have
all of our Pods running that new container image, and all the Pods using the
previous container image are terminated. When using deployments to manage
our application state, an update is triggered by changing the Pod template, which
is where we define the Pod and its configuration. So if you change any part of
the Pod template, that's going to trigger a rollout since it will need to push that
new configuration out into the cluster. So, in addition to the container
image, which is a very common reason to update your application, you might also
need to update other elements of the Pod template or other configuration
elements for your Pods, like the container restart policy, secrets, environment
variables, and so on, anything that changes the Pod template. Now, other fields in
the deployment spec can be changed without triggering a rollout. For example, if
we adjust the number of replicas, that's not going to trigger a rollout
because that's part of the deployment spec, not part of the Pod template. We'll
look at other configuration elements in the deployment spec later on in this
module, and those too will not trigger rollouts. Let's look at a visualization of how
Kubernetes manages state transition when rolling out a new application or a new
version of an application inside of our cluster. And so let's look at controller
operations, specifically deployment updates. So at the cluster level, let's say we
declare a deployment that we want Kubernetes to roll out, and this will be the
first version. So in this case, it's going to create a ReplicaSet, R1, and it's the
responsibility of the ReplicaSet to create the Pods that are part of this
deployment. Now remember, a deployment is used to declaratively move
between versions of ReplicaSets. So I can come along later in the lifecycle of this
deployment and say, hey, Kubernetes, I have an update to this particular
application I want you to push out. Now, how does Kubernetes determine that it's
time to update an application? Well, when we make an adjustment to the Pod
template. And when we make an adjustment to the Pod template, then
Kubernetes will sense that and initialize a new version of the ReplicaSet on that
new Pod template that's defined. Most commonly, that's going to be something
like a container image update. And so what Kubernetes will do is initialize a new
ReplicaSet, and so, in this case, R2. So that ReplicaSet will be created, and then
it's the responsibility of the deployment to manage the transition between the
two versions of the ReplicaSet. How does it shut down Pods, how does it start up
Pods, and managing that state transition for us. And as we go through this
module, we'll learn some techniques on how we can control how we move
between versions of ReplicaSets. Now, one of the key things about Kubernetes as
it moves between versions of applications is it still keeps that previous version of
the ReplicaSet around. So if we have to roll back, we can and go back to version
R1 here. Now, we also have up here this thing called the pod-template-hash as
part of the deployment. That's how Kubernetes determines who's part of which
ReplicaSet. And so the pod-template-hash is actually a deterministic hash value
of the ASCII text in the deployment object of the Pod template itself. And so
we've seen this in some demonstrations. It's that alphanumeric value that we use
as part of the pod-template-hash or labels that are associated with
the ReplicaSets and the Pods created with that ReplicaSet, and we'll look much
more closely at that when we get into some demonstrations. Now, generally
speaking, when working with deployments, you're going to have a couple those
with a service. And it's the responsibility of the service to distribute workload to
the running Pods that are associated with it. And so, as we remove Pods from
ReplicaSet 1, those will be deregistered from the endpoints of the service. And as
Pods are started up in ReplicaSet 2, those will be registered as endpoints in the
service. And so we can maintain availability of our applications as we
move between versions and essentially have zero downtime deployments as
we move between ReplicaSets 1 and ReplicaSet 2, so very valuable functionality
there. I do want to add the caveat that there might be scenarios where your
application doesn't support that. But if you can move between versions of your
application, this is a very valuable tool to roll out new versions of our apps with
zero downtime. If you are in a scenario where you can't have both ReplicaSets up
at the same time, perhaps due to some application incompatibility, we can
leverage different update strategies to help us still move between those versions
of our applications, and we'll explore those a little bit later in this module. Let's
look at a few ways that we can trigger updates and rollouts in Kubernetes. Now
we're going to go through some imperative techniques initially and then shift
gears at the end and look at the declarative technique or the preferred way to
change our our deployments and update our deployments in Kubernetes. The
first way that we're going to do this is with kubectl set image, so let's walk
through this command here. Kubectl set image, that's the thing that we're going
to change, on the deployment hello-world, which is the name of the
deployment. Inside of that, we have hello-world=, which is going to be the
container image that we're going to update inside of the deployment, and we're
going to set that container image to hello-app 2.0. And so what that's going to do
is initialize the creation of a new ReplicaSet based on that new container image
or the 2.0 container image. And then Kubernetes, the deployment, will then start
shutting down the Pods as those new ones start up, rolling out the new image
and leaving us with the 2.0 Pods when we're done. Now, I want to encourage you
to use this option here. So in addition to the things that we just discussed, we're
going to add this flag, --record, because what's going to happen when we do --
record is it's going to capture some additional metadata information about the
change that you just made. And it's going to store that information in an
annotation associated with the deployment object. The annotation is called the
CHANGE-CAUSE, and in there, we'll see a text representation of what we did with
that particular object. Now that data that's stored in that annotation is going
to become very valuable later when we look at how we roll back to previous
versions of images. I think you can see what I'm getting at here. If we use this
option, we're going to get a lot more info that tells us what changed between the
two versions, and then we can make better decisions when we have to roll back
to previous versions, so always add that flag. Now, we can also use kubectl edit to
interact with the objects too, so let's walk through this command, kubectl
edit. What do we want to edit? A deployment. Which deployment? Hello-
world. When we execute this command, what that's going to do is go make a
request of the API server to retrieve that deployment object and present that to
us in our local console in a text editor, and we'll get the YAML representation of
the deployment. We can go down to the Pod template, make an adjustment, save
that out, and then when we save that out, kubectl will ship that back into the API
server to affect that change and initialize that rollout. And the final technique or
the preferred technique, we're going to use a declarative operation
with Kubernetes to affect this change. And so here's what we're going to do is
we'll make an edit inside of a YAML file that represents the deployment that we're
going to work with. We'll update whatever we need to update inside of the Pod
template, save that into the YAML manifest, and then kubectl apply -f and then
the name of the manifest, in this case hello-world-deployment.yaml, and ship that
back into the API server. Once that hits the API server, it's going to trigger the
rollout based on the changes in the Pod template and start that rollout process
for us. Now, similarly to the previous scenario with the imperative kubectl set
image command, we'll also want to add --record to the kubectl apply
option, again, to capture additional metadata about the change that we're
making and the annotation associated with our deployment object. So now that
we know what a deployment is and how we can trigger a deployment update or a
deployment rollout by updating the Pod template, let's look at how we could
check the status of the deployment in Kubernetes. And the first method that I
want to show you is kubectl rollout status deployment and then specifying the
deployment name. This will give us an interactive view of what's going on at the
command line and outputting to the console as new Pods are starting up an
old Pods are shutting down and then culminating with an output of Our rollout
was successfully completed. So that's a good way to see things interactively at
the command line, but what if you want a big-picture view of what's going
on? And that's where kubectl describe comes in. Kubectl describe is my favorite
command in Kubernetes, giving us the deep-dive information about a specific
object. And so here, we'll say kubectl describe deployment and then specify the
deployment name. Inside of there, we're going to see some deployment
statuses, and we're going to look at three of those right now, the first one being
complete. When the deployment status is complete, well, that'll be the case
where all replicas are up to date, and all previous replicas or Pods are no longer
running and that all of the new Pods are up and running and in the status of
Ready. Progressing is when a new ReplicaSet has been created and is being
scaled up, so it's the responsibility of Kubernetes to start those Pods with the
new Pod template. When we're in the Progressing state, that's also the case
where the old ReplicaSets are being scaled down, so those Pods will be shutting
down. So that's that transition period between the new Pod starting up into the
new ReplicaSet and the old Pod shutting down into the old ReplicaSet. Now the
final state, and hopefully we don't end up in this state very often, is Failed. What
happens here is the update couldn't complete, meaning that the new ReplicaSet
couldn't be scaled to the desired number of replicas or the desired number of
Pods, and this can happen for lots of different reasons. It could be resource
constraints in the cluster or quotas on a namespace for a particular rollout, but it
could be also the case that our readiness probe is failing and something is wrong
inside of our application or really a combination of any of these. Just something
got in the way of that new ReplicaSet being created and scaling to the desired
number of replicas.
Demo: Updating a Deployment and Checking
Deployment Rollout Status
All right, so here we are in a demo. Let's look at how we can update a deployment
and then check a deployment's rollout status. Here we are logged into c1-master1
where we're going to drive our demos from. And the first demo that we're going
to do together today here is updating a deployment and checking our rollout
status. And so let's start off with rolling out an application, and we'll do that with
kubectl apply -f deployment.yaml. Let's go ahead and and run that code
there, and you can see, at the bottom here, we can see deployment.apps/hello-
world is created and also the accompanying service for this particular
application. Now, let's look at deployment.yaml to see what it is that we just
did. Now inside of here, we have, like we would any other Kubernetes object, an
apiVersion, a kind, a metadata, and a spec. And so our apiVersion is going to be
apps/v1. The kind is going to be deployment. The metadata is going to contain
the name of the deployment. And inside of the spec, the technical details of what
we're configuring. And so here we see replicas 10 inside our deployment spec. We
see the selector associated with that. And then at line 10, we see the start of the
Pod template. Inside of there, the metadata and labels associated with the Pods
that are going to be stamped out by this Pod template. And then in the spec, the
containers associated with this application. Here we have just one, which is going
to be our hello-world container. Now, line 17 is the most important line for this
demonstration. We're running a container image, hello-app:1.0, and that's going to
be what we update. We're going to change from 1.0 to 2.0, and so let's go ahead
and kick back over to our demo script here and start that process. I do, before we
proceed updating this application, want to check out the rollout status of the
current version of the app. And so here we see kubectl get deployment hello-
world. Let's go ahead and run that code and look at that output. Now, kubectl get
deployment hello-world gives me some pretty good concise information. It gives
me the name of the deployment hello-world. It tells me that 10 of 10 Pods are up
and ready and that 10 are up to date on the most newest version of our
application. We see that 10 are available, and then it's been up just for a few
seconds here since we just created this together. Now let's scroll down a little bit
further and look at the next line of code, line 14, where we're going to roll out
version 2 of our application. Before we do that, let's go ahead and look at
deployment.v2.yaml and see what the differences are. There should only be one
difference between these two files, deployment.yaml and deployment.v2.yaml. If
we go down to line 17, we'll see here that the container image is going to be hello-
app:2.0, and that's going to be the new version of the application that we want
Kubernetes to roll out for us. And so let's kick back over to our deployment
script, bringing this into view here, and let's go ahead and run kubectl apply -
f deployment.v2.yaml to start the rollout process. Now, very quickly, I'm going to
go down and run the line 18, which is kubectl rollout status deployment hello-
world. So hang tight while I do both of those things. So we start the rollout, and
there we can see that our deployment is configured. And then, we have kubectl
rollout status deployment hello-world, which is going to give us the output of the
rollout as it's happening. So there we can see, on the first lines there, 9 out of 10
new replicas have been updated. And so it's scaling up that new ReplicaSet. And
then a couple of lines down, we see three replicas are pending termination, so it's
scaling down the old ReplicaSet. And as we go through that output, we can see 3
old replicas, 2 old replicas, 1 scaling down. Then we see 8 of 10 updated replicas
are available, 9 of 10 available scaling up the new ReplicaSet. And then the final
line, deployment hello-world is successfully rolled out. So now we know our
deployment has successfully completed. Now in addition to looking at the output
here, we can also grab the exit code from that application. And if it returns a 0, we
know that our application deployment deployed successfully. And so there we
see the exit status of that application is 0. In the upcoming demonstration, I'm
going to show you a failure, and that would return a 1 in that case. So let's walk
through some deep-dive information about our deployment and look at all the
various attributes of that particular deployment that we were working with. And
so let's go ahead and run this code here, kubectl describe deployments hello-
world. Now we have lots and lots of information to go through in this output, so
let's scroll to the top, and we'll go through almost all of this together. So when we
get to the top here, we see the name of our deployment is hello-word, and it's in
the default namespace, and it was created just a few minutes ago. Now in the
annotations, we see deployment.kubernetes.io/revision: 2. There have been two
revisions of this deployment, the initial one, which was the revision 1, and the one
that we just updated to when we changed out that container image, revision
2. We see that the selector for the deployment is app=hello-world, and then we
have a lot of information in this replicas line here. So let's walk through each one
of these together. Now 10 desired. Desired is the total number of Pods or replicas
that we want up and running in this deployment. And in both deployment.yaml
files that we used, we defined in the deployment spec that we wanted replicas
10. That's that same value. Now, the next value we have here is 10
updated. Updated is the number of Pods in the new ReplicaSet. So these are the
ones running the new Pod template that we updated in that new
deployment. Now we see 10 total. Total is the total number of Pods in both
ReplicaSets, and it's possible that this value is actually going to be greater than
the number desired. And we'll look at some of those scenarios in the
upcoming demonstrations when we talk about controlling rollouts. Then we see
10 available. This is the total that are currently up and running and reporting
Ready across both ReplicaSets. And so we know that our deployment
finished, and so we know that these 10 available are in the new ReplicaSet. And
we see that 0 are unavailable. Now unavailable is the total number of Pods that
are in the NotReady status. And so those Pods could be failed for any number of
reasons. Maybe there's a misconfiguration in our rollout or that application is
crashing and is unavailable. Now StrategyType, MinReadySeconds, and
RollingUpdateStrategy, we're going to look at those much more closely in the
upcoming part of this module when we talk about controlling rollouts. Next up,
we see our Pod template, and that label that's associated with the Pods is going
to be app=hello-world. Our container image, which we just updated to hello-
app:2.0 is what's defined here. If we go a little bit further, we see conditions, and
conditions give us some good insight about the status of our rollout. And so here
we see two conditions, Available and Progressing, and they're both set to the
status of True. Now, the available condition says MinimumReplicasAvailable, and
so that means that there are the required number of replicas up and running in
this application to support this deployment. In an upcoming demonstration, we're
going to look at a failed deployment, and that value will certainly be something
different, and we'll see that in a little bit. Now Progressing True
NewReplicaSetAvailable, Now, that could be one of two conditions. That could
mean our deployment is still progressing, or it's completed. And we know that
we're completed because we just checked that with kubectl rollout status. Now
there's two other values I want to check out here, OldReplicaSets and
NewReplicaSet. NewReplicaSet is pinned to the new version of our application
that we just rolled out, so there we see hello-world 54875c5d5c. That's the
NewReplicaSet, and 10 of 10 are created because that's what we want in that
particular deployment. Now, OldReplicaSets isn't populated with a value. But
during the transition between two ReplicaSets, while we're scaling up the new
one and scaling down the old one still and there's still Pods in the
OldReplicaSet, that value would be populated there. Now, let's go down to
events, which is my A number 1 favorite place to go when I'm looking for more
information about an object in Kubernetes. In the events here for the
deployment, we have lots of information available to us. And so on that first line
there, we see the initial scaling or the initial deployment of our application when
we rolled out the version 1.0 of our app. And then driven by the deployment
controller, we see that we scaled up the ReplicaSet hello-world 5646fcc96b to
10. So that went from 0 to 10, and it was the responsibility of the ReplicaSet
controller inside that ReplicaSet to deploy those Pods. Now, just after that, we
told Kubernetes to roll out a new version of our application. So the next line we
see scaling up replica set hello-world 54875c5d5c to 3. If we look at the new
ReplicaSet value, we can see that's the new ReplicaSet. So it starts to scale up
that new ReplicaSet, starting at 3. And then, what it does is Kubernetes starts to
scale down the old ReplicaSet. So there we see the next line for the ReplicaSet
ending in 96b to 8. And then the next line, d5c to 5, 96b to 7. And so as we see the
new ReplicaSet scale up, we'll see the old ReplicaSet scale down. And with
that, let's go ahead and look at both of those ReplicaSets with kubectl get
replicaset. And so here we see the one ending in d5c is on 10. That's the newest
version of our application or NewReplicaSet. And there we see 96b, which is the
previous version of our application, is scaled to 0. Now both of these are going to
stick around for a little bit, and we'll talk about how long they stick around later
on in this module. But that's a very valuable thing to keep around because we
can roll back to that previous version of our application if we need to.
Demo: Updating a Deployment and Checking
Deployment Rollout Status (cont.)
So let's go ahead and keep moving forward and look more closely at the
individual ReplicaSet. So we're going to start off by looking at the new
ReplicaSet, kubectl describe replicaset, and this one is going to be the one
ending in d5c. Inside of here, if we go to the top of this information, we'll see the
name, which ends in d5c. The namespace is default. And then the selector is very
important here, app=hello-world, and then there's the Pod template hash ending
in d5c. That's how we determine the Pod membership of the Pods managed by
this ReplicaSet, which is eventually managed by the deployment, which you see,
Controlled By: Deployment/hello-world. ReplicaSets, 10 current 10 desired, so we
are in a good place in that 10 are up and running. We'll go down a little bit
further. Inside of the Pod template for this ReplicaSet, we can see the version 2.0
of our application. We also see the labels associated with this Pod
template, app=hello-world and then again the Pod template hash, making sure
that each one of these Pods has the appropriate labels for this particular
ReplicaSet's selector to determine membership. If we go down a little bit further
in the events, since this is the new ReplicaSet, all we see is the scaling up
operation. And so the replicaset-controller here has the responsibility of
going from 0 to 10 to bring us into the desired state. If we look at the old
ReplicaSet, the one ending in 96b with kubectl describe replicaset, it's going to
run that code, we're going to see a little bit different of a story. Let's go ahead
and scroll to the top, and we'll see the name. There we see hello-world ending in
96b. The selectors for this one, app=hello-world and then the Pod template hash
for this particular ReplicaSet, the one ending in 96b. If we scroll down a little bit
further, we can see Controlled By: Deployment/hello-world and that replicas are
set to 0 and that 0 are desired. So we know that this is the scaled down
ReplicaSet. Inside the Pod template, we see the appropriate labels and the Pod
template hash, and then the image for this particular ReplicaSet is version
1.0. Now if we go down to the events, we see the initial creation of this ReplicaSet
when we did the initial deployment driven by the replicaset-controller, that
ReplicaSet ending 96b scales up, so we see those 10 Pods. And then when I
updated the deployment, now we see deleted Pods scaling down this
ReplicaSet. So now we kind of get the full story of what's happening when
Kubernetes rolls out an application. We can look at both ReplicaSets. We'll see
the scaling up of the new one. In this case, we see the scaling down of the old
one. And at the deployment level, we can see the transitioning between the two
versions of the ReplicaSets by looking at the information in these kubectl
describe commands that we just reviewed.
Using Deployments to Change State and Controlling
Updates with UpdateStrategy
The update that we just performed in the demonstrations were all using the
default settings for our deployment. Now, Kubernetes gives us some controls or
some configuration points that we can use to control the rollout of new versions
of our applications. And so, we can work with in Kubernetes concepts like update
strategy, which is how Kubernetes manages the transition between versions of
ReplicaSets in our application. We can also use Kubernetes deployments to
pause rollouts to make corrections. So perhaps mid-rollout, we determine that
there's something wrong with our deployment. We can pause our rollout, make an
edit, and then resume our rollout with that new configuration. We also have the
ability to roll back to an earlier version of our application or an earlier version of
our deployment, transitioning you back to a previous ReplicaSet. And finally, we
can restart the deployment. When a deployment is up and running, you can issue
a restart, which will restart all the Pods in a deployment. Now, let's take a closer
look at each one of these methods to help us control our deployments. The first
tool that we're going to look at in terms of controlling our rollouts is update
strategy. Update strategy controls how Pods are rolled out, and we've already
seen an example of this in our previous demonstration. We saw the RollingUpdate
update strategy in effect. This is the default update strategy inside of a
deployment. What RollingUpdate will do is start up a new ReplicaSet and start
scaling up that ReplicaSet. And then, as that ReplicaSet starts scaling up, it will
start scaling down the old ReplicaSet and managing the transition between the
two as it scales the new ReplicaSet up to the desired number of replicas and
then scales the old ReplicaSet down to 0. That's the RollingUpdate update
strategy. Now there's also the Recreate update strategy, which terminates all the
Pods in the current ReplicaSet first prior to scaling up the new
ReplicaSet. Now, you might see this when you're moving between versions
of applications that can't run concurrently in your particular applications that
perhaps there's a conflict in some sort of data structure or persistent state, things
like that. And so this is a common strategy to use when you're doing those heavy
lifting version migrations. But most commonly, as you move between
applications, we're going to engineer towards using the RollingUpdate
update strategy because that allows us to move between versions of
our applications with next-to-zero downtime. So, let's look more closely at the
RollingUpdate strategy and some configuration points that we can use to control
the rate at which Pods are rolled out in Kubernetes deployments or, more
precisely, the rate at which we move between versions of our ReplicaSets as
we scale down one side and scale up the other side. And so, those two
configuration points are maxUnavailable and maxSurge. These are defined inside
of the deployment spec, and each one of these values has a unique way
of controlling the rate of rollout. And so let's discuss it in more
detail. MaxUnavailable ensures that only a certain number of Pods are unavailable
or being updated at a particular point in time. And by default, this is going to be
25%, which means if I have a deployment, say of 20 replicas, the most number of
Pods that will be unavailable or not supporting my application will be 4 because I
want to ensure that the remaining set of Pods that are up and running or
available are enough to support my workload that's coming in. Now this value can
either be a percentage or a fixed integer value, and so the default being 25%, or I
can just specify that I want to only have 4 Pods down at any given
time, depending on how I want to control that transition between those two
versions of my application's ReplicaSets. The other value that we have to work
with is maxSurge. MaxSurge ensures that only a certain number of Pods are
created above the desired number of Pods in our replicas. And so, when we
define the deployment, we define a number of replicas, let's say 20. Well, when
we're transitioning between versions of ReplicaSets, as we scale down the old
ReplicaSet and scale up the new ReplicaSet, it's possible that as we scale up the
new ReplicaSet, the number of Pods are going to exceed the number of Pods that
are desired across the whole deployment, and that's going to help us
move between the two versions. Well, I might need to put a limit on that based on
the resources that I have available. And so this value, maxSurge, allows me to do
that. MaxSurge also can be a percentage and, by default, is 25% and also could
be an absolute or a fixed integer value, if needed.
Successfully Controlling Deployment Rollouts and
Defining an UpdateStrategy
Let's discuss some key tips to successfully control deployment rollouts in
Kubernetes. The first thing I want you do when working with rolling out a
new version of an application with deployments is define an update strategy in
your deployment spec that's appropriate for your application, whether you're
using Recreate or RollingUpdate. And if you're using RollingUpdate, be sure to
define maxSurge and maxUnavailable values that are appropriate for your
applications and your infrastructure. The next thing that I want you to do is to
define a readiness probe in your Pod template spec. A Kubernetes deployment
will stop a rollout if the number of Pods not passing readiness probes goes below
that maxUnavailable value for a RollingUpdate update strategy, thus protecting
your application and leaving a set of Pods up and running and online on the
previous version of your app. Those will still be functioning and supporting your
workload. If there is no readiness probe defined in the Pod, the Pod is considered
ready when it starts, which means the rollout will continue. And if your application
isn't responding correctly, the deployment will continue the rollout of that
nonfunctioning application. So use readiness probes to ensure your apps are up
and ready and give the deployment the intelligence it needs about your
application to help maintain a functioning app during a deployment rollout. Let's
look at some code to define a rollout strategy for a deployment and also leverage
a readiness probe. And so, much like any other deployment, it's going to start off
with an apiVersion of apps/v1, a kind is deployment, the additional metadata
information that we would need to define our deployment, and then the
deployment spec itself. Inside of the spec for the deployment, we're going to
define a number of replicas. And so for this deployment, we're going to roll out 20
replicas. And here's where we can define a strategy. In this case, we're going to
define a strategy type of RollingUpdate. And then within that, we define the
RollingUpdate settings that we want to define. So in this case, we're going to
define maxUnavailable at 20% and maxSurge at 5. Now remember, either one of
these values could be a percentage or a fixed integer number. So in this case, I
chose 20% for maxUnavailable and 5 for maxSurge. With maxUnavailable set to
20%, that's going to be 20% of 20 replicas, which means, at most, Kubernetes will
shut down 4 replicas or 4 Pods when doing a rollout. And then, from a maxSurge
standpoint, we know that it will only ever start up 5 additional Pods above the
number of replicas defined, in this case 20. So we'll only ever see 25 Pods or 25
replicas when a deployment is rolling out an update. Now, with the update
strategy defined, we'd have any additional settings that we would need inside of
the deployment spec, and then we'd go over to the Pod template. Inside of the
Pod template, we'd have any specific information regarding the template that we
want to roll out and then the Pod spec. And, of course, inside the Pod spec, inside
the Pod template, we'll define the containers and all of the information
associated with that, things like the image, name, and so on. Inside of here is
where we'll define the readiness probe. In this case, for this particular
deployment, I'm going to use an httpGet readinessProbe with the path
of index.html on port 80. We'll define an initial delay of 10 seconds and a period of
10 seconds. And so initial delay means when the Pod starts up, it's going to wait
10 seconds before it checks that readiness probe. And then it's going to have an
interval check or a periodSeconds of every 10 seconds, checking to see if this
particular application is responding correctly. Now, the combination of these two
things will help me lead to a better rollout. I've defined a RollingUpdate strategy
with settings appropriate for my infrastructure, and I've defined a readiness
probe, such that if I start rolling out my application and something goes wrong
and that readiness probe fails, then the deployment will stop. Now, if you want to
get more into readiness probes, do check out my course, Managing the
Kubernetes API Server and Pods, where we go deep into how to define a
readiness probe and all of its various configuration attributes.
Pausing and Rolling Back Deployments
Let's say you started a rollout and found an issue that you need to fix or needed
to make an additional configuration change that was forgotten once you
initialized the rollout. Well, if you just went ahead and edited the deployment
object, that would trigger a subsequent rollout that will be processed after the
current rollout is finished. And that could be bad because you might need to
intervene and act and stop the current rollout such that it preserves the stability
of the current version of your application. And so, Kubernetes gives us the ability
to pause a rollout, make changes to that deployment, and then resume the
rollout, and so let's talk about how that works. When we have paused a rollout,
changes to the deployment, while it's paused, are not rolled out. And so this gives
us the ability to batch together any additional changes to the object or what
we're rolling out when we make those edits. And then when we're ready, we can
resume the rollout. When we resume the rollout. The current state of the
deployment is maintained until we restart things up and resume that rollout. And
once we do start up or resume our rollout, a new ReplicaSet with the new
changes will be deployed such that we'll start moving from the previous version
of our application into this new ReplicaSet, the newly defined rollout where we've
made those edits and changes and started our rollout back up again. From a
syntax standpoint, we can do this at the command line with kubectl rollout
pause. The deployment is the thing that we're going to stop. In this particular
case, I want to pause the deployment my-deployment, so kubectl rollout pause
deployment my-deployment. Now when we're ready and after we've made those
changes and we've batched them all together and we have our
corrected deployment that we want to rollout, kubectl rollout resume my-
deployment. Now, what if you started rolling out an application and things went
wrong, and you need to roll back to the previous version of your application. Let's
say we rolled out version 2 of an app, and all of a sudden, the containers are
crashing, or the application is not responding correctly, or maybe even there was
a configuration error in the Pod template. Maybe we misconfigured a readiness
probe on the wrong container port. Either one of those things can cause us some
grief as we roll out our application, crashing applications or misconfigured
readiness probes. Now, what do we do in these scenarios? Kubernetes gives us
the ability to roll back to a previous version of a deployment. As we change
objects in Kubernetes, Kubernetes deployments will track rollout
history. Specifically, it's going to track the CHANGE-CAUSE as an annotation to
the deployment object that you're working with. And within that, it's going to
track the revision history of the changes that we make. So each ReplicaSet or
each Pod template that's associated with the version change will be tracked
inside of the metadata about our deployment object. How much revision history
is maintained? Well, by default, it's going to be 10. But if we need to change that
value, we can set the revision history limit as part of the deployment spec for our
application. So we can increase this value or decrease this value based on the
needs of our applications. What this is really doing under the hood is maintaining
the number of ReplicaSets or the history of those ReplicaSets over time, and
those ReplicaSets will have the Pod template configuration that is appropriate for
that particular ReplicaSet. Now remember, as we move between versions of
ReplicaSets, it's the job of Kubernetes to scale down the old version of our app
and scale up the new version of our app. So a rollback is simply the reverse. We'll
scale down the new one and scale up an old one. And so this is very useful for
rolling back our applications. If needed, we can also set the revision history limit
to 0, which would mark the ReplicaSet available for immediate cleanup, and that
would then be deleted once the deployment is successfully rolled out. Now,
when it comes to actually rolling back an application, we need to do a couple of
things. We need to find out which version of our app we want to roll back to, and
then we need to tell Kubernetes to roll back to that version. And so since
Kubernetes is tracking the version information over time, up to 10 by default, we
can ask Kubernetes for the version information of a particular deployment and its
rollout. And so let's go ahead and see how we do that. We can use the command
kubectl rollout history deployment hello-world to get the version history of the
rollouts for this particular deployment, in this case hello-world. Now once we
have that, we can see the changes that are happening inside of our
application. Let's say we want to go back to a particular version of our
application, but we want to look at those changes a little more closely. And so we
can ask Kubernetes kubectl rollout history deployment hello-world and then
specify a revision, in this case revision 1. There we'll see the actual Pod template
information from that version, so we can see the app configuration that we'd be
rolling back to if we selected that revision. If we're at the command line and we
want to just roll back to the previous version and we don't want to investigate
a particular version to roll back to, we can use kubectl rollout undo deployment
hello-world, and this will roll back the hello-world deployment to the previous
version, which is the version before the one that we're on right now. And if we
need to roll back to a particular version, we can say kubectl rollout undo
deployment hello-world --to-revision and then specifying the actual
revision number that we want to roll back to. And then Kubernetes will do the
work of scaling down the new ReplicaSet and scaling back up the old
ReplicaSet. There may come a time where you need to restart all the Pods in a
deployment. Perhaps you've had an environment variable change that you need
to roll it out to all of your Pods, or you need to recover from some sort of transient
error. A restart can help you do that. What a restart does is effectively restarts all
the Pods in your deployment using the same Pod template spec. But as we've
discussed in previous courses, no Pod is actually ever recreated or
restarted. What you get is a new set of Pods in a new ReplicaSet. So what's
happening behind the scenes is that Kubernetes creates a new ReplicaSet and
scales down the old ReplicaSet while scaling up this new ReplicaSet. The
transition between the two ReplicaSets is governed by your update
strategy, which can be either RollingUpdate or Recreate. Now, those two
ReplicaSets will be based on the same Pod template spec, so it is the same
version of your application in that new ReplicaSet. Now, to initiate a restart, you
can use kubectl rollout restart deployment and then the deployment name, in
this case hello-world.
Demo: Rolling Back a Deployment and Controlling the
Rate of a Rollout with UpdateStrategy
Now, let's get into a demo. We're going to look at rolling back of
deployment. We're going to make a change to our application and then roll back
to the previous version. Once we have that under control, let's look at how we
control the rate of a rollout with some of the configuration settings that we
discussed in the presentation portion of the course. Then, we're going to learn
how to combine readiness probes with our deployments so that we can control
rollouts, ensuring our application's availability during the rollout. And then finally,
we're going to look at restarting a deployment. So here we are logged into c1-
master1, and we're going to work through the process of updating the deployment
and then rolling back to a previous version. So, if you do have any demos in
flight, let's go ahead and clean this up with kubectl delete deployment hello-
world and kubectl delete service hello-world. I really want to start with a blank
slate in this demonstration. So here you can see, when I ran that code, I didn't
have either one of those defined. Now I'm going to redefine our version 1
deployment that we've been working with with kubectl apply -f
deployment.yaml. And then, once that's rolled out, I'm going to quickly update
that version 2. And so that's going to change our container image from hello app
1.0 to hello app 2.0. So that's where we are right now. We've made one update. So
let's go ahead and look at what's next in this particular demonstration. And what
we want to do here is I'm going to roll out a deployment that I know is broken, and
let's go ahead and look and see inside that code what precisely is
broken. Now, this one is going to start off just like any other deployment with an
apiVersion, kind, metadata, and spec. Now, I've added a new line to this
deployment to look at here. We have progressDeadlineSeconds is 10. Now, we're
going to update our deployment with a broken image, which we're going to look
at in a second. And then normally what's going to happen is Kubernetes will roll
that application out, and it'll wait up to 10 minutes, which is the
progressDeadlineSeconds. That 10-minute default is how long it's going to take
before Kubernetes will mark that deployment failed on that bad rollout. For this
demonstration, I'm shortening that to 10 seconds so we can quickly fail the rollout
that we're working with right here because we're intentionally going to break our
configuration with a bad container image. And so let's go ahead and scroll down
a little bit and look at that. And here you can see, in the Pod template, inside the
spec from the particular Pod that we've defined a container image. But if you look
at the name of the container, it's not quite right. We have hello-a-p instead of
hello-a-p-p. And so this is going to yield a broken container image pull. And so
let's jump back over to our deployment script and see how Kubernetes handles
this. So let's go ahead and roll that code out and go ahead and look at
the deployment status for this particular application rollout with kubectl rollout
status deployment hello-world. After about 10 seconds, this should short-
circuit, fail the deployment, and give me my command line back. And
certainly, that's what it did as here we see error deployment hello-world
exceeded its progress deadline. The default value is 10 minutes, so we could have
waited it out for 10 minutes. But I wanted to have mercy on everyone, and we set
that value to 10 seconds in the deployment spec. Now that's an artificial value
good for demonstrations. You'll want to establish a value that's appropriate for
your rollout strategy and how you roll out your applications. So let's go ahead and
keep moving forward. And remember, the last time we did a rollout, when I looked
at the return code of kubectl rollout status, I got a 0, which was good. That means
that the program executed and completed the rollout successfully. Let's look at
the value now. Now here, we see we have a 1, so we know that failed. Let's go a
little bit further, just kind of get some investigation as to what's going on with this
particular rollout and see how it failed. So if we look at kubectl get pods, let's look
at how Kubernetes is doing with the rollout. So we see two ReplicaSets, hello-
world-54875c5d5c, the other one with the Pod template hash of b8c6b6b49. Well,
we know we injected a bad container image, and the status there is error image
pull, which is fantastic. We know exactly what's going on here from a state
standpoint. But let's look at what Kubernetes did with the rollout because it
stopped the rollout. It failed the rollout and kept 8 of our previous Pods up and
running and only put out 5 new Pods on that bad version. So this is fantastic
because we messed up, well, more precisely, I messed up in this particular rollout
intentionally, but we still have 8 functioning Pods in our 10-replica rollout, which
is great. We've lost a little bit of capabilities, but our app is still up and
running. Kubernetes started up these 5 additional Pods and was like, hey, these
aren't working correctly, let's stop. And so let's look at why this all happened and
how it came together. If we go into kubectl describe deployments hello-
world, we're going to get a lot more information about the status of what
occurred. And so let's go ahead and scroll up and walk through the deployment
information in here. So, here we see the name of this deployment is hello-
world. And if we go down into the definition of this deployment, it looks precisely
at the replicas. We can see that there were 10 desired and that there were 5
updated. So 5 new Pods were rolled out with the new configuration, and those
were broken, so there we see 5 unavailable. Now, we also see that there are 13
total and 8 available. So this 13 total comes from the 8 from the previous
ReplicaSet, which are still up and running and available, but also the 5 that are
unavailable, so there's 13 across both ReplicaSets. Now, Kubernetes stopped at 8
available, so it knew to keep 8 Pods up online. How did it know how to do
that? Well, the RollingUpdate strategy was specified to have 25% of
maxUnavailable. And so 25% of 10% approximately is going to be 2, and so that's
where we get those 2 Pods that got shut down with the maxUnavailable of the
old ReplicaSet. Now, if we scroll down a little bit further, let's go ahead and check
out the conditions. So conditions are going to have some different values here as
well. We see Available True MinimumReplicasAvailable, which is great, because
we have those 8 Pods from our previous ReplicaSet up and running or the old
ReplicaSet. But we also see Progressing as False, where previously we saw
Progressing as True because it was working towards rolling out or it had
completed. Here, we see Progressing False because of this reason,
ProgressDeadlineExceeded. I artificially set it that low, short-circuited the rollout,
and stopped. Now if this was 10 minutes, we just would have waited it out, and we
would have landed at this value as well. So, let's go ahead and bring our console
back up and scroll down a little bit further and see how we can fix this bad
rollout. Now, we'll walk through and ask Kubernetes, well, what does it know
about this particular rollout. And so we can do that with kubectl rollout history
deployment hello-world, and that's going to give me the revision history for this
particular deployment. And well, I see three revisions, but no CHANGE-CAUSE is
set. We see none set for all of those because, as we rolled out these changes, I
didn't use the --record flag, which I told you we should do. And that's why I
wanted to do this here to show you and highlight what happens when you don't
do that. So I don't know right here what information I need to know about rolling
this application back. And so let's go ahead and look a little closer as to how we
can make an intelligent decision on what version of our application to roll back
to. So let's go ahead and scroll down a little bit further in the demo. And here,
let's use kubectl describe deployments, again, hello-world and pipe it into head. In
the annotations, we can see deployment.kubernetes.io/revision is 3. So we know
we're on revision 3 right now. And let's go back and ask Kubernetes some more
detailed information about the revisions that it does know information about. So
on line 49 here, I'm going to ask specifically about the information for revision
2. So we'll say kubectl rollout history deployment hello-world --revision=2. Let's go
ahead and run that code, and we can see there that our container image is okay.
We see hello-app, a-p-p, :2.0. That's cool. That's what we want. Let's go ahead
and check revision 3 just for completeness, and there we can see the error, hello-
ap:2.0. So, we know we want to roll back to revision 2. Let's go ahead and scroll
down a little bit further and do that. We can do kubectl rollout undo deployment
hello-world, and then we're going to specify the exact version we want to go to.
We're going to go back to revision 2. Let's go ahead and run that code. We can
see that it comes back with hello-world rolled back. If we check out our
deployment status here, we can see our deployment hello-world successfully
rolled out, so we're back on the previous version. If we check the exit code, it
should be a 0. Everything is good there. If we check the Pods, let's do a kubectl
get pods and see where we are. Now we can see we have 10 Pods back up and
running. We have the 8 that stayed online and 2 additional ones that have been
up for about 19 seconds since they're running on the previous version of the
ReplicaSet, scaling that back up to the defined number of replicas in the
deployment, which is 10. So, let's go ahead and clean this up and delete the
deployment and delete the service and move into the next demonstration.
Demo: Using UpdateStrategy and Readiness Probes to
Control a Rollout
All right, so let's go ahead and clear our console and start off fresh and
work towards the next demonstration that we want to do. In this
demonstration, I'm going to combine a rollout strategy with a readiness probe so
we can learn how to control the rate of a rollout, but also ensure a successful
rollout of our application. And so let's go ahead and check out the file that I
want to rollout in deployment.probes-1.yaml. So inside here, we see a deployment
spec where we're defining that we want 20 replicas online and that our update
strategy is going to be RollingUpdate with the parameters of maxUnavailable set
to 10% and maxSurge set to 2. So at most, we're ever going to have to Pods offline
in this particular deployment. We've increased our revision history limit to 20. And
inside of the Pod template, we've defined, inside of the Pod spec, a container
image of hello-app:1.0. That app is going to run on container port 8080, and
we've defined a readiness probe of httpGet with the path of index.html on the
port 8080. Now these two are very important, initialDelaySeconds 10 and
periodSeconds 10. And so what initialDelaySeconds 10 is it's not going to
check the container application until 10 seconds after the Pod and container are
created and started. What that means is we'll have a little bit of a delay in
the rollout of our application before this particular app reports that it's up and
running and healthy. And this could be valuable in scenarios where you do have a
slow application startup time in your Pod-based applications. So let's go and
jump back over to deployments and run this particular rollout. And so, I'm going
to deploy this application with kubectl apply -f deployment.probes-1.yaml and --
record so that I can capture the metadata operations about this rollout in the
CHANGE-CAUSE annotation of this particular deployment. So, let's go ahead and
run that code. And quickly, I'm going to jump down here. I'm going to run a
kubectl describe deployment because I want to capture that information at the
very beginning of that rollout. We're going to look at some critical values here so
that you can learn how Kubernetes manages this type of rollout. So as I scroll
back to the top, let's go ahead and get to the top of the output here. There we
see name is hello-world. So inside of here, in the replicas, this is kind of the
important part for this particular demonstration. So we set an initialDelaySeconds
of 10. And so right now we see that there are 20 Pods desired and that 20
are updated and running the newest version of the application, which just so
happens to be the first. We see that there are 20 total across all
ReplicaSets, again just one ReplicaSet, so we have 20. But interestingly, we see
that 0 are available and 20 are unavailable. So there's 20 Pods up and
running, but none of them are reporting ready yet because of
the initialDelaySeconds on the readiness probe. If we go down a little bit further
and we look at the current conditions, we see Available False
MinimumReplicasAvailable because we don't have the minimum number of
replicas required for this ReplicaSet up and running inside of our application. And
we also see Progressing True ReplicaSetUpdated. That's good because it knows
that it's rolling out this new version of our application. So if we scroll down now,
and since we waited a few seconds, and I do another kubectl describe
deployment hello-world, and I scroll back up, let's go ahead and check the status
now. If I look at replicas, I see 20 desired, 20 updated, 20 total, 20 available
because these are now passing the readiness probes because our applications
are up running online and have all been checked and are available and are now
part of a successful rollout for this particular deployment. So, let's go ahead and
scroll down and look at the conditions. We also see Available True
MinimumReplicasAvailable; Progressing True NewReplicaSetAvailable. So we
know we're in a good state in our rollout. So, let's go ahead and update our
application, and so let's bring our prompt up as well. And at the top here, I'm
going to show you that I have two deployment files, the one that we just ran,
deployment.probes-1.yaml, and I'm going to update our application to
deployment.probes-2.yaml. And using the diff command here, just a quick
difference so that we can see that those files are identical with the exception of
I'm going to rollout a new version of my container image from 1.0 to 2.0. So let's
go ahead and use kubectl apply -f deployment.probes-2.yaml --record to capture
that metadata. And here we can see that our hello-world deployment is
configured, as well as our service. If we scroll down now, let's go ahead and check
out what's going on with our application. I want to look at this first from the
ReplicaSet level. And here we can see that we have 18 Pods in our old ReplicaSet
ending in 58b, and we have 4 Pods in the new ReplicaSet ending in 5f9. And so,
that seems like it's kind of slow. So how do we know if that's progressing? Let's go
ahead and look at the conditions and replicas inside of kubectl describe. So let's
go ahead and execute kubectl describe deployment hello-world and look at
some of the important values inside of here. And so, we know that we're rolling
out our application. And because I've tested it, I know that this is going to be a
successful rollout. And so let's kind of go through the information because what I
did do with this rollout is I slowed things down with setting maxUnavailable to 10,
maxSurge to 2, and setting that 10-second readiness probe. So things are kind of
grinding slowly through our deployment, and this could be a valid deployment
scenario if you want to kind of slowly rollout a new version of an application
without potentially impacting production workloads. And so, let's go ahead and
look at the status. So, in our annotations, we can see that we're on revision 2. And
if we look at replicas, we see that there are 20 desired, and 12 have been
updated. So 12 are running the new version of our application. Because maxSurge
is set to a value of 2, we can see that we only have 22 total or 2 above desired, so
22 total Pods across both ReplicaSets. There are 18 Pods available that are up
and running because we have 10% set as maxUnavailable. So at most, we'll only
ever go down 18 available in this configuration. That value is 25% by default. So I
shrunk that window to 10% because I wanted to keep lots and lots of Pods online
in this particular deployment. We see that we have 4 unavailable, and those are
ones coming up in the new ReplicaSet that haven't quite past their readiness
probes yet. If I scroll down a little bit further, let's go ahead and check out some
more information. We can see that in the conditions that we have Available True
MinimumReplicasAvailable. So we're in a healthy state because we know we have
18 Pods up and running and supporting our workload. We also see Progressing
True ReplicaSetUpdated because now we're in the phase where we've started up
the new ReplicaSet, and those Pods are being created. Now this deployment
takes about a minute to complete rolling out. So hopefully by the time I get down
and run this code again, we can see that it would be finished. So let's go and
check that. I'm going to run this code here one more time, and we'll scroll up,
check out the replicas area of our deployment. Now we see 20 desired, 20 up to
date, 20 total, and 20 available. So that rollout of the new version of
our application, hello-app 2.0, has completed. We can see that here with this
current configuration. If we scroll down a little bit further, we also see that old
ReplicaSets is done, so that's scaled down, and our new ReplicaSet 20 of 20
created. So we know that that rollout has completed successfully. So let's go
ahead and change one more thing in our application. This time, I'm not going to
tell you what I'm going to change because I want to troubleshoot it together. And
I'm going to rollout some code in kubectl apply -f deployment.probes-3.yaml, and
I want to use --record to capture the data about this particular operation. So I did
not set a progressDeadlineSeconds on this deployment, and so it's going to
default to 10 minutes. This is different than our previous demo where a short-
circuited the bad rollout in 10 seconds, and that rollout failed. And so when I go
ahead and check my kubectl rollout status for this deployment, we're going to
see that I get to 4 Pods and things stop, which is great because now I know that I
still have a good chunk of Pods up and running and supporting my application
still. And so let's go ahead and break out of here. And since I know this is a failed
deployment, let's go ahead and walk through some of the things that we would
look at in a failed deployment, how we can discover this, make a good decision,
and correct it. So, let's go ahead and run kubectl describe deployment hello-
world. Go ahead and scroll to the top here and look at the status of this rollout. So
here we can see in replicas that 20 are desired and 4 are updated or running on
the new version of our application. There's 22 total across our app. That's going to
include the 18 that are currently available for our old version of our ReplicaSet
and the 4 that are coming up that are unavailable in the new ReplicaSet. So we
see that there are 4 unavailable, which is interesting. I'm going to hold onto that
piece of information. And so, let's go ahead and break out of here and move on
and see how else we can troubleshoot this. And the next thing I want to do is I
really didn't get a big piece of information to grab onto in the kubectl describe
deployment, so let's go ahead and look at this from a different level to see if we
can get another piece of information to grab onto with regards to our
deployment. And so here's kubectl get ReplicaSet, and we have the three
ReplicaSets that have been part of this particular deployment, the initial rollout, a
v1 of our app that was running on the ReplicaSet ending in 58b. Then, we
updated that the version 2 of our application to the ReplicaSet ending in 5f9. So
we see 18 that are desired, current, and ready. Now, we've rolled out a new
version, that third deployment, and we can see that in that ReplicaSet ending in
76, we have a desired 4, current are 4, so there's 4 Pods that are up and
running, but 0 are ready, and that's something that I want to kind of hone in
on because I see that I started those Pods up, but they're not reporting as
ready, which means that the rollout for those particular Pods is seen as
unsuccessful by the deployment controller. So the deployment stops, which is
great because we don't go below maxUnavailable of 10% with 2 Pods offline in our
old ReplicaSet. And with maxSurge set to 2, we don't go above 22 total Pods
across both ReplicaSets with the desired count of 20 replicas. With this, the
deployment can't proceed because no more Pods can be shut down, and this is
great because we've protected our application, keeping 18 Pods online and
supporting our app. So let's go ahead and look at this again at another level since
I know that ready is 0. That kind of is a hint to me. What else have we defined
working with this particular deployment? A readiness probe. Let's go ahead and
look at kubectl describe deployment hello-world and see what the readiness
probe is for this particular Pod template. If I go in here, I can see the readiness
probe is an httpGet readiness probe, and it's looking on http://:8081. All right, well,
what's the container port for this particular application, 8080? So clearly, when I
made this demonstration, I must have had a typo in that particular
deployment, and Kubernetes didn't want to roll that out and continue to break
my application. And it stopped when it rolled out those 4 new Pods and
they started failing their readiness probe, leaving us with 18 Pods still online or
10% of maxUnavailable. So we had a nice healthy rollout because of two
things. We combined it with a RollingUpdate strategy with settings appropriate
for our application, but we also combined it with a readiness probe because
that application wasn't coming up as ready, or I misconfigured it and it isn't able
to check to see if it's ready. If those Pods didn't have a readiness probe
defined, Kubernetes would have just continued to roll out those Pods without any
consideration of the health of the application. So let's go ahead and see how we
can get out from underneath this. So let's go ahead and ask Kubernetes for the
rollout history of this particular deployment that we've been working with. Let's
go ahead and make sure that we grab that whole command there and run that
code. And now we can see what happens when we use the --record options. We
get some additional information in our revision history. So we have three revisions
to this particular deployment. The one where we used kubectl apply with
probes-1, -2, and -3. Now, let's go ahead and look a little bit closer at version
3. That's the last bit of code that we rolled out. So I'm going to say kubectl rollout
history deployment hello-world --revision=three. I'm going to look at the Pod
template here. That's where I made the change to 8081, so we know that that's
the bad one because we see our container port is on 8080. Let's get ahead and
look and kind of walk back to the next version, so we'll look at revision 2. Run that
code there. Cool, 8080. Now I know this is a good one, and so we're going to take
this code and make the decision, yep, run version 2 of our app. We're running a
readiness probe on 8080. Our container port is 8080. We're in good shape
here. And so let's go ahead and roll back this deployment to that particular
revision, and we can do that with kubectl rollout undo deployment hello-world --
to-revision=2. Let's go ahead and run that code. It's going to quickly roll back our
application. I'm going to go ahead and check the status of our deployment
with kubectl describe deployment. Pipe that into head. And there at the bottom,
we can see we have 20 desired, 20 that are updated, 20 total, and 19 available. So
I got it a little early. I have 1 still unavailable. If I run it again, there we go, 20
available, 0 unavailable. And so what happened there is when I rolled back
the application, Kubernetes scaled down that misconfigured ReplicaSet and
scaled back the old ReplicaSet from revision 2 back up to the desired number of
replicas, which is 20. And then those container probe started the check, and we
went from 19 available to 20 available. If I do a kubectl get deployment, we can
see 20 of 20 already are up to date on the current version of our application and
that 20 are available. Let's go ahead and delete this deployment and delete the
service and move forward into our next demo.
Demo: Restarting a Deployment
Now for our next demo, we're going to work on restarting a deployment. And
so, let's go ahead and create a fresh deployment so we can get some nice,
clean, easier-to-read logs without all the other work that we've done in the
previous demos. And so on line 156 here, I have kubectl create deployment hello-
world for our hello-world application that we've been working with, and I'm
specifying 5 replicas. And so that's going to create a deployment with 5
replicas. And so let's check the status of that deployment before we move on, and
here we can see from the output of kubectl get deployment, we have hello-world
and that 5 replicas are up, running, and ready. So let's check out those Pods with
kubectl get pods. And what I want to point out here is the Pod template hash for
these Pods ends in 555. And so what we talked about what a restart will do is
transition between two different ReplicaSets. And so I want to call out that that's
the first ReplicaSet there and also our age, so just 17 seconds that these Pods
have been up and running. And so to initiate a restart, we can use kubectl rollout
restart deployment and then the deployment name, hello-world. And so I'll run
that code there, and that will initiate the restart, creating the new ReplicaSet,
scaling down the old ReplicaSet, and scaling up the new ReplicaSet. And in this
case, when I created the deployment, I didn't specify an update strategy. The
default is RollingUpdate, and so it's going to transition between the two
ReplicaSets using the RollingUpdate update strategy. And so let's check out what
the restart did with kubectl describe deployment hello-world. And in the events
at the bottom here, we can see that our deployment controller did just that. It
created a new ReplicaSet ending in 846. It then started scaling down our old
ReplicaSet, the one ending in 555. And so there, in the second line of the events,
we see hello-world with the Pod template hash ending in 846, scaling up to 2.
And then we see the old ReplicaSet scaling down to 4 all the way down to 0 in
the last line of the output here. And so if we do a kubectl get pods here, what we
see is our 5 new Pods up and running, effectively restarting the Pods, but since
no Pod actually ever gets recreated, we have a new set of Pods in a new
ReplicaSet up and running. And in the output here, we can see all 5 of those Pods
with the Pod template hash ending in 846, and they've been up for just over a
minute now. So let's clean up from this demo with kubectl delete deployment
hello-world and head back into the presentation portion of the course.
Scaling Deployments
Now the final method that we're going to look at in this module about managing
the state of our applications with deployments is scaling deployments. And
Kubernetes gives us two ways to scale our deployment, so we can do this both
manually and automatically. And let's look at manually first. Now, manually, when
we're working with Kubernetes objects, we, of course, can come along and
change an object imperatively at the command line. And so to scale a
deployment, whether it's up or down, I just simply say kubectl scale
deployment, the name of the deployment, in this case hello-world, and then I
define the number of replicas, in this case 10. It could be 20, 100, to whatever I
need to make modification to my application state. Now, that's imperatively at the
command line. And, of course, I'm going to encourage you to do this declaratively
in YAML in code. Inside of there, inside the deployment spec, we would define
the number of replicas that we want for the next state of our application. It could
be more; it could be less depending on how we want to roll out that
change. Now, there's another way in which we can control scaling deployments
inside of Kubernetes, and that's the Horizontal Pod Autoscaler. The Horizontal
Pod Autoscaler is a Kubernetes resource that scales the number of Pods in a
replica set or deployment based on resource utilization, and the changes to this
are going to be driven by the controller manager. Now, we're not going to dive
into HPA, or Horizontal Pod Autoscaler, today in this course. We're going to save
that for a future course. In this course, we're going to focus on manual scaling,
and we'll do that in our upcoming demonstration.
Demo: Scaling a Deployment
Now, let's get into the final demo for this module. Let's look at scaling
deployments. So here we are logged into c1-cp1, and let's start off with creating
and scaling deployments. And the first technique that we're going to use today is
imperatively at the command line. So on line 7 here, I have the code that we've
seen throughout this course and the series of courses on Kubernetes where
we're going to create a deployment at the command line with kubectl create. So
on line 7, I have kubectl create deployment, the name of the deployment, hello-
world, and the container image that we want to launch, which is our hello-app
container. So let's go ahead and run that code, and what that's going to do is
create a deployment with exactly one replica in it. And so let's check out the
status of our deployment to confirm that. With kubectl get deployment hello-
world, we can see that our hello-world deployment is up and running and that
one replica is ready. Now moving forward, we can scale our deployment
imperatively at the command line with the command kubectl scale. And so on
line 15, I have the code to do just that, kubectl scale deployment hello-world --
replicas=10. Let's go ahead and run that code there, and what that's going to do
is create 9 additional replicas in our deployment for a total of 10. Let's go ahead
and confirm that that actually occurred with kubectl get deployment hello-
world. And in the output at the bottom there, we can see 10 of 10 replicas are up
running and ready. So with that, let's go ahead and repeat this demonstration, but
we're going to do that with declarative deployments. So let's delete our current
deployment with kubectl delete deployment hello-world. That's going to delete
the deployment, delete the ReplicaSet supporting that deployment, and also the
10 replicas. And what we're going to do now is create a deployment declaratively
in code. And so on line 27, I have the code to do just that, kubectl apply -f
deployment.yaml. So inside this deployment.yaml file, we can see this is the
deployment that we've been working with throughout this module. The key
difference here is on line 6. We're going to start this deployment with 10
replicas. And so there on line 6 inside the deployment spec, we see replicas 10. So
jumping back over to our driver script, let's roll that code out with kubectl apply -
f deployment.yaml. And in the output at the bottom, we see deployment.apps/
hello-world created and also the accompanying service, which is also in that
deployment.yaml manifest. Let's check the status of our deployment with kubectl
get deployment hello-world. And in the output there, we can see the name of the
deployment, hello-world, and that 10 replicas are up, running, and ready. Now, the
key difference between using imperative techniques and declarative techniques
is, well, we want to write our changes in code when we're using declarative
techniques. And so what we have here is a second deployment manifest that I
want to roll out. It's nearly identical to the deployment manifest that we just
rolled out. I just have it into two separate files for us for demonstration
purposes. The key difference between these two files is what we see on line
6, replicas 20. And so to declaratively scale our deployment, that's how we'll make
that change. We'll make that change in code and then give that code to the
API server to affect that change in the cluster. And so just to confirm that replicas
is the only difference between the two manifests on line 35 here, I have a diff of
the original manifest and the new manifest with 20 replicas. And in the output at
the bottom, you can see replicas 10 in deployment.yaml, replicas 20 in
deployment.20replicas.yaml. Now the way that we affect that change in the
cluster is with kubectl apply. And so we'll take that new deployment manifest and
feed that in the API server to affect that change. And so in the output at the
bottom, after running kubectl apply, we see deployment.apps hello-world
configured. That tells you that the state of that deployment changed. It one from
10 to 20 replicas. And we also see service/hello-world unchanged. That was also
inside deployment.20replicas.yaml, but there were no changes to be affected
into the cluster. And so let's check the status of our deployment with kubectl
get deployment hello-world, and now we can see our deployment is scaled up to
20 replicas. And in the output there, we see 20 of 20 up, running, and
ready. Looking at a little bit closer, we can look at the events for the deployment
with kubectl describe deployment. Let's run that code and check out the events,
and we see two scaling operations in the events for this resource. In the output at
the bottom, we see the initial creation of the deployment, which created
a ReplicaSet and scaled back to 10. And then a few seconds later, when
we deployed that second manifest to make that change, we can see the scaling
operation in the events scaled up ReplicaSet to 20. And so there we can see that
later in the output. So that's a wrap for this demo. Let's go ahead and delete our
resources, both our deployment and our service, and move back to the
presentation portion of the course.
Successful Deployment Tips, Module Review, and What's
Next!
So as we bring this module to a close, let's talk about some deployment tips to
help make sure that your deployment rollouts succeed inside of Kubernetes
when you're managing your application state with deployments. First up, always
control your rollouts with an update strategy appropriate for your application. It
could be Recreate, it could be RollingUpdate, but make sure you're selecting an
appropriate rollout strategy for when you need to make changes to
your application configuration with deployments. Next up is always define a
readiness probe for your application. Give Kubernetes that additional information
that it needs so that it can understand the health of your application. You saw in
the demonstration where I had a misconfigured readiness probe, and Kubernetes
was able to stop that rollout with only taking two Pods offline. I had 18 of 20 Pods
in my deployment still up and running and supporting my application, a very
valuable piece of functionality when it comes to controlling rollouts in
Kubernetes with deployments. And then finally, use the --record option to leave a
trail of your work for others. It might not be you that comes along and has to
troubleshoot a failed rollout. It might be a coworker of yours or someone else that
needs to get in there, and using this --record option will give them
additional information to help them troubleshoot and get that application back
into a desired state. Well, here we are at the end of the module, and we covered a
lot of information. We looked at configuring and managing application state with
deployments in Kubernetes, and we learned how we can use deployments to
change state of our applications, whether it's to roll out a new version of our app
or to change a specific Pod configuration inside of a Pod template. We also
learned how to control rollouts in terms of update strategy, whether it's Recreate
or RollingUpdate, and also how to control that with readiness probes to make
sure that we have successful rollouts. And then we wrapped it up with scaling our
application, both imperatively and decoratively at the command line so that we
can scale our apps to meet the demand of our workloads. Well, here we are at the
end of this module. Why don't you join me into the next module, Deploying and
Maintaining Applications with DaemonSets and Jobs. In this module, we'll cover
how we can build different types of workloads with these types of controllers
inside of Kubernetes.
Deploying and Maintaining Applications with
DaemonSets and Jobs
Introduction, Course and Module Overview
Hello. This is Anthony Nocentino with Centino Systems. Welcome to my course,
Managing Kubernetes Controllers and Deployments. In this module, we're going
to learn how to deploy applications with some additional controllers in
Kubernetes, the DaemonSet, Job, and CronJob controllers. So far in this course,
we learned how controllers work and how we can deploy, scale, and update our
applications with the Kubernetes object, deployments. Now, let's look at how we
can model and deploy different types of workloads in our Kubernetes cluster in
the module Deploying and Maintaining Applications with DaemonSets and
Jobs. Now that we have a pretty good understanding of how ReplicaSets work
and how we can use deployments to roll out our applications inside of
Kubernetes, let's look at working with some additional controllers inside of
Kubernetes. We're going to look at DaemonSets, Jobs and CronJobs, and
StatefulSets and how we can use these controllers to model additional workload
types in our cluster.
Controllers in Kubernetes and Understanding
DaemonSets
So far in this course, we've looked closely at both ReplicaSets and
deployments. Now let's look at some additional controller types and the
workloads that they support. First up is a DaemonSet. DaemonSets are useful if
you need to run a single Pod on every node or a subset of nodes in your
cluster. Think of this as having Kubernetes manage system daemons for you as
you would in a traditional Linux system with systemd or init. Next is Jobs. If you
need to run something in your cluster just once, you can leverage a Job to do
that. Perhaps you need to run a batch Job or a task, and you need to guarantee
that it runs to completion. That's where Jobs will come in. If you need to run a Job
on a schedule, you can do that. Kubernetes gives us the CronJob controller. This
will run a Job, the controller type that we just introduced, on a periodic
interval. And then finally, the StatefulSet. This is a controller type that provides
the needed infrastructure for stateful applications, for example persistent
naming, ordered operations for things like scaling and updates, and it also
manages persistent storage. I'm going to introduce StatefulSets in this module
conceptually, but we're going to cover them in much more detail in a later course
on storage. The first controller that we're going to look more closely at in this
module is the DaemonSet. The DaemonSet ensures that all or some nodes in a
cluster run a copy of a Pod. Effectively, this becomes an init daemon inside of
your cluster so that you could run basically cluster services much like you would
run system services in a traditional Linux system. The DaemonSet has the
responsibility of ensuring that those services are up and online in your
cluster. Example workloads that you might see deployed as DaemonSets, well, I
can guarantee you have at least one DaemonSet up and running inside of your
cluster right now, and that's the kube-proxy providing the network services inside
of your cluster. Additional workloads that you might see deployed as DaemonSets
include log collectors, metric servers, resource monitoring agents, and storage
daemons. So these types of workloads, specifically log metric and resource
monitoring agents, have the responsibility of collecting data and shipping it off
into other tools, and so you might want those running on every node in your
cluster. Storage daemons you would see running on every node of your cluster or
perhaps a subset of nodes in your cluster wherever you would need access to
that specific type of storage provided by that storage daemon. Now, let's get a
visualization of the controller operations provided by
DaemonSets. Basically, where does Kubernetes when it runs a DaemonSet, place a
workload or Pods in the cluster. And so here we have a cluster with the control
plane node and a collection of worker nodes, and I come along and define a
DaemonSet that I want to ensure is running on each node in the cluster. And so
when I declare that DaemonSet, it's the responsibility of the DaemonSet
controller to deploy a Pod on each node in the cluster. But if you notice here, it
didn't put a Pod on the control plane node. And so if I come along and define my
own user DaemonSet, that's going to be deployed on all the nodes in the cluster
with the exception of the control plane node because the control plane node
is tainted for non-system service functions and workloads. And when you look at
system DaemonSets like kube-proxy, you'll find that they're deploying each and
every node in the cluster, including the control plane node, because they
will have a toleration for that taint. If you want to dive more taints and
tolerations, head over to my course Configuring and Managing Kubernetes
Storage and Scheduling. When it comes to scheduling Pods associated with
DaemonSets, by default, Kubernetes will ensure that one Pod will be scheduled
to each worker node in the cluster by the default scheduler. And as nodes are
joined to the cluster, they will get a copy of that Pod. And we saw that in the
demonstrations in my course Kubernetes Installation and Configuration
Fundamentals where we built a cluster and added additional nodes to the
cluster, and it was the responsibility of the DaemonSet that controls the kube-
proxy to ensure that each additional node that we added got a copy of the kube-
proxy Pod. Now, if needed, we can control which nodes in our cluster get a copy
of a Pod. Perhaps we don't need it to run across all nodes in our cluster. Maybe
we need to run a Pod on a subset of nodes in our cluster. And then, the
DaemonSet spec we can define a node selector. And in conjunction with labeling
the nodes our cluster, then we can have our DaemonSet run Pods on a subset of
nodes in the cluster. Let's take a look at what it takes to define a DaemonSet in
YAML, and we would kick it off much like any other API object inside of
Kubernetes with an apiVersion. In this case, it's going to be apps/v1 for the
current version of a DaemonSet. The kind is going to be DaemonSet, and the
metadata is going to have to have a name. In this case, it's going to be hello-
world-ds. Now, inside the spec or the technical specification of this
particular controller object, we'll define a selector. And much like any
other controller in Kubernetes, it's going to use labels and selectors to determine
Pod membership to this particular controller. This time we'll use matchLabels. But
of course, we could use matchExpressions here if we need it, and then we'll
provide the labels that we want associated with the selector for determining Pod
membership. Now in the Pod template, we'll define the metadata, which
will include the labels and the key and the value such that those satisfy the
selector defined up top. And so that would be stamped out for each Pod created
by the DaemonSet. Then, we would go along and define the spec inside of the
Pod template, which would include the container definition, the name, image, and
so on. That's going to be how we define a DaemonSet inside of Kubernetes. So we
just looked at how to create a DaemonSet inside of our Kubernetes cluster, and
that's going to guarantee that a Pod is going to be running on each node in our
cluster. But what if we needed to run a Pod on a subset of nodes in a cluster?
Then, we can do that with defining a DaemonSet with a node selector. And so
let's go ahead and walk through the code to do that in YAML. The first part of this
is going to look the same as it did just a second ago with apiVersion, kind,
metadata, and spec. Inside the spec, when we define the Pod template, that's
where things are going to change up a little bit. We'll still have the metadata and
the labels associated with the Pod that's getting stamped out by the DaemonSet,
but inside the spec inside the Pod template, that's where things are going to
change just a little bit. We'll define a node selector and a label with a key and
value pair, so, in this case, node hello-world-ns. We'll take that label, and we'll
assign that label to each node in the cluster that we want to run this Pod on. That
could be all of them, that could be a subset of them, based on how we want to
run this particular workload in our cluster. Now the value in using a DaemonSet
with a node selector is great in that we get away from using static names
associated with nodes. We're going to use labels to say I want to run this Pod
on this subset of nodes in my cluster or even an individual node if that's what's
needed. But we do get out of the business of statically assigning this to specific
nodes in our cluster and leveraging labels to place the workload in a cluster. Now
the remainder of this configuration would look like any other Pod template spec
where we define the containers, the name of the containers run, and the images
associated with them.
Updating DaemonSets
Now, earlier in this course, we learned how we can leverage an update strategy to
control the rate of rollouts inside of deployments in Kubernetes. Let's look at how
we can use a similar technique inside of DaemonSets and look at DaemonSets
update strategies. The first update strategy available inside of DaemonSets is the
RollingUpdate update strategy. With this update strategy, after you update the
DaemonSet Pod template, old DaemonSet Pods will be killed, and new dataset
Pods we created automatically in the place of the previous Pods. And it's going to
do this in a controlled fashion. This RollingUpdate update strategy has a setting,
maxUnavailable, which can be set to a percentage or an integer value, the
default value being set to 1. The RollingUpdate update strategy is the default
update strategy for DaemonSets. So, if we don't define an update strategy and we
don't define a maxUnavailable setting, the DaemonSet controller will work its way
through our DaemonSet one Pod at the time, replacing those in our cluster. The
next update strategy available for DaemonSets is the OnDelete update
strategy. And so after you update the DaemonSet Pod template, new DaemonSet
Pods will be created only when you go manually delete the old DaemonSet Pods
in the cluster. Now if something goes wrong with your DaemonSet Pod update
Rollout, you can edit the Pod template again to update the object, and that
new configuration will start replacing the old configuration, basically pushing you
towards that desired state defined in that latest version of the DaemonSet spec.
Inside of DaemonSets, there's really no concept of pausing an update here. We
would just simply redefine what we want to have happen with a new edit
and push that out, and then DaemonSet controller will work its way through the
cluster using the update strategy that we defined.
Demo: Creating and DaemonSets Controller Operations
All right, so let's get into our first demo where we're going to look at creating a
DaemonSet together. We're going to do two scenarios here. We're going to create
a DaemonSet on all nodes in our cluster and then a second DaemonSet that runs
on a subset of nodes in the cluster. And then finally, we'll look at how we can
update a DaemonSet and roll out a new Pod template with a new container
image. Here we are logged in to c1-master1, and let's walk through some demos
on working with DaemonSets. And the first thing that we're going to do is look at
a DaemonSet that already exists on our system, the kube-proxy, and then drive
through creating our first DaemonSet on all of the nodes in a cluster. And so, let's
get started. The first thing I'm going to do here is get a listing of nodes so that we
know the number of nodes that we're working with in a specific cluster and how
Kubernetes is going to roll out Pods to these nodes and in what number. And so
let's go ahead and run kubectl get nodes. And we can see that I have four nodes
in my cluster, one master and three worker nodes. And so, the first DaemonSet
that we're going to look at is the kube-proxy DaemonSet. And to get the
information about that DaemonSet, I'm going to say kubectl get
daemonsets, specifying the namespace kube-system and then the name of the
DaemonSet. In this case, it's going to be kube-proxy. It's going to run that
code. And here we can see, we have four kube-proxy Pods running on the nodes
in a cluster, one for each and every node, including the master. So let's go ahead
and move forward and bring this code into view here, and let's create our first
DaemonSet together and jump over to that DaemonSet.yaml file that I have up
here and walk through this configuration. So we see apiVersion apps/v1, kind
DaemonSet, metadata, we're going to give it a name of hello-world-ds. Inside the
spec, I'm going to define a selector for this DaemonSet, which is going to have a
matchLabels type, and the label is going to be hello-world-app. If I scroll down a
little bit, you can see inside the Pod template, we're defining the metadata and
the labels for the Pods stamped out by this DaemonSet. And then in the spec,
that's the container image that we're going to deploy, which is going to be our
hello-app:1.0. Jumping back over to the demo script here, let's go ahead and roll
out this code with kubectl apply -f DaemonSet.yaml and run that code. If I go
down a little bit more, if I do a kubectl get daemonsets, you can see this
DaemonSet only rolled out to the three worker nodes in our cluster. We have
three Pods that are up and running because our master node is tainted and is
only going to run system Pods, including the kube-proxy Pod. If I want to see a
little bit more information about this DaemonSet, I can add the -o wide flag to
kubectl get daemonsets, run that code, and we can see a little bit more info
about how this DaemonSet was rolled out. So in addition to the information that
we got from kubectl get daemonsets, we also get things like the container that's
running and the specific image followed by the labels associated with it. But if I
want to see which nodes the Pods landed on, I'm going to use this command,
kubectl get pods -o wide, run that code there, and now we see the three Pods
that were deployed by the DaemonSet and the nodes that they were deployed
on. So on the left there, we see the name, so hello-world-ds followed by a unique
Pod identifier. And in the NODE column, we can see that one Pod was assigned to
each node because I have an entry or a Pod running on c1-node1, c1-node3, and
c1-node2. And so one Pod is running on each worker node in our cluster. Let's go
ahead and use my favorite Kubernetes command, describe, and look at the
detailed information about the DaemonSet, so kubectl describe daemonsets
hello-world. I'm going to pipe that into more so it doesn't run off the screen and
get this good detailed information about our DaemonSet. We're going to walk
through this information together. So there we see the name hello-world-ds and
the selector that is used to determine Pod membership, and that's going to be
app=equals hello-world. If we go down a little bit further, we can see the desired
number of nodes scheduled, which is 3, and the current number of nodes
scheduled, which is 3. So Kubernetes knows that there's three worker nodes, and
it needs to have one Pod on each node that is part of this cluster. We also get to
see the number of nodes scheduled with up-to-date Pods. So there we know if
we're running the latest version of our application and also the number of nodes
scheduled with available Pods. Is that Pod up and running and ready on that
particular node in the cluster? If we go down a little bit further, we can see the
Pod template, and there you can see the container image is our hello-app:1.0. And
at the bottom here, in the events, we can see how the DaemonSet controller had
the responsibility of creating both of these three Pods right away. So we see
three entries, one for each of the Pods that it had to create. So let's keep moving
forward and look at these Pods from a different standpoint. Now, I'm going to ask
Kubernetes and say, hey, Kubernetes, kubectl get pods, but this time I'm going to
add the show-labels flag to that command, and we get some additional
information about these Pods. We get all of the labels associated with it. And so
on the right there, we see the label for the selector, which is going to be
app=hello-world-app. And so this particular Pod has that label, and that's how it
determines membership of the DaemonSet. But the DaemonSet also has the
responsibility of tracking updates so that we see two additional labels here that
are associated with how it tracks the versions of the Pods that have rolled out in
this DaemonSet. So there we see controller revision hash, which is very similar in
concept to the Pod template hash in deployment. And then finally, we see there
pod-template-generation set to 1, this being the first deployed DaemonSet
running that first container image. So, let's go to work with those labels a little
bit. I'm going to show you how Kubernetes is going to handle this or, more
specifically, the DaemonSet controller is going to handle something like changing
the Pod label. And so if I go ahead and grab the Pod name of the very first Pod in
that list, that's part of our DaemonSet, which is what that syntax does right
there, all I'm going to get out of that syntax is the first Pod in the list, in this case
ending an 8cf2l. What I'm going to do here is I'm going to adjust the label of the
Pod. I'm going to change the Pod from something that's within the selector
to something that's outside of the selector. So kubectl label pods MYPOD
the variable which has an individual Pod name in it, I'm going to assign it the label
of app=not-hello-world and specify the overwrite flag, label that Pod, and I want
you to take a guess on what Kubernetes is going to do now. Is it going to create a
new Pod? Is it going to shut that Pod down? What's it going to do to maintain the
desired state? Let's go ahead and run kubectl get pods again with show-labels
and see what it did for us. And so in this listing now, we see four Pods. And the
very first Pod there, we see that it's been up and running for a little bit over
5 minutes, and we see that the label is app=not-hello-world. But we also see a
Pod that was newly created 16 seconds ago that does have the label app=hello-
world-app. So that's within the selector and the first Pod being outside the
selector. So we can see similar to what we did with deployments where we can
push a Pod outside of the selector for some additional analysis. Kubernetes is
simply going to replace that Pod on that node where that previous Pod was
labeled and removed from the selector. And so now we can work with this Pod,
make any corrections, perform some log analysis, or delete the Pod if we're
finished with it, and it's no longer of use to us since it's been replaced.
Demo: Creating DaemonSets with NodeSelectors and
Updating DaemonSets
Now let's go ahead and move into our next demo and clean this DaemonSet
up. Let's go ahead and delete that DaemonSet and also delete the Pod that we
moved outside of the selector for the DaemonSet. And the next thing that we're
going to do together is create a DaemonSet on a subset of nodes. And so, within
this DaemonSetWithNodeSelector.yaml file, it starts off the same as our previous
DaemonSet. But the key difference is in the Pod template where it now includes a
node selector. So their on line 14, you can see it specified a nodeSelector and, on
line 15, the label that I'm using for the node selector, which is node and hello-
world-ns. So let's jump back over to our demo script and run that code and roll
out that DaemonSet. Now, let's go ahead and check the status of that rollout and
do a kubectl get daemonsets. And uh oh, we can see that I have zero Pods
deployed. All right, well, I just deployed the DaemonSet, ran the code. I expected
it to run some Pods, and it's not. All right, so I want you to take a guess as to why
that's not happening. Why did the Kubernetes DaemonSet controller not start up
any Pods? Well, we need to label some nodes to satisfy that node selector. And to
do that, we'll use kubectl label node, and then we're going to label the c1-node1
node, and we're going to apply in the label node=hello-world-ns. And so that's
effectively going to apply that label to the c1-node1. And now, we have a node
that's within the node selector for that particular deployment. So the DaemonSet
controller will do what? It's going to rollout one Pod on that node. Also, in the
output here, we can see that we have data in our NODE SELECTOR column. It's
looking for a label of node=hello-world-ns. If we look at the output of kubectl get
daemonsets -o wide, we see additional information, such as containers, images,
and the labels associated with this DaemonSet. Moving forward, if I do kubectl
get pods -o wide, hopefully we have a Pod on c1-node1, and yes we do. So that's
because we applied that label to that node, and then the node selector attribute
that was defined inside of the Pod template now is satisfied. It can put a Pod on a
particular node. So what happens if I remove a label now? If I go kubectl label
node c1-node1 node-, if I do this and remove that label, what's the DaemonSet
controller going to do? It's going to terminate that Pod, and we can see that here
by looking in kubectl describe daemonsets hello-world-ds. We can see that 67
seconds ago when I applied the label, it created the Pod. And then 5 seconds ago
when I removed the label, it deleted the Pod. So we can control where these
things live and breathe inside of our cluster by adjusting the labels real time. And
so if we know a node is coming online, we can apply a label to it and push
workload to that if that's how we need to deploy our systems. And so let's go
ahead and clean up this demo and do a kubectl delete daemonsets hello-world-
ds and move into the next demo where we're going to update our
DaemonSet. And so I'm going to rollout that DaemonSet that we started our
demos with where we we're just going to run the version 1 of our
application across all worker nodes in our cluster. And so we should see three
Pods are created, and there we can see those in the events there. And also in the
Pod template, we can see the container image is set to 1.0. Now, we didn't define
an update strategy in DaemonSet.yaml. In fact, we used pretty much a barebones
configuration to get our DaemonSet rolled out. But, if we look at kubectl get
daemonset hello-world-ds -o yaml and pipe that into more, there are some
default values that are set within the DaemonSet's configuration. So let's go
ahead and look at those. We talked about these during the presentation portion
of the course, but I want to highlight that they are always set inside your
configuration. So, as we went further down in the YAML that describes this
DaemonSet, we can see updateStrategy: RollingUpdate, maxunavailable: 1, type:
RollingUpdate. And so what it's going to do, the DaemonSet will shut down a Pod
and replace it. It's going to move to the next node, shut down a Pod, and replace
it and so on as it works its way through the cluster. So let's go ahead and break
out of there and go ahead and update our application. So just to show you that
the only thing that I'm changing between these two YAML files, we're going to do
a diff between DaemonSet.yaml and DaemonSet-v2.yaml. You can see the only
thing that's different between these two is the container image. We're going to
go from 1.0 to 2.0. If I do a kubectl apply -f DaemonSet-v2 on that YAML file, roll
that out, we can see it's configured. Let's go ahead and check the rollout status
with kubectl rollout status daemonsets hello-world-ds. And in the output here, we
can see that DaemonSet is slowly working its way through the cluster, updating
Pods and started them up on the nodes. If we do a kubectl describe daemonsets,
we can see, in the events here, we have the initial deployment 115 seconds ago
that created 3 Pods on each node in the cluster, then that fourth line there that
happened 21 seconds ago deleted the Pod and then immediately replaced it. And
it works its way through the cluster, deleting the Pods at 15 seconds. It deleted
Pod sf62l and replaced it with a new Pod, n8gk9. So it works its way through the
cluster one at a time based on how we configured the update strategy. In our
case, we left it as default. If we scroll up a little bit further, we can see that the
container image in our Pod template is certainly the 2.0, so we're up to date with
our application. Go up a little bit further in this output, and then we see that the
number of nodes scheduled with up-to-date Pods is 3. So we know we're running
the latest version of our application across the cluster here. Let's go ahead and
keep moving forward in the demo. Do a kubectl get pods --show-labels one last
time, and we can see some new information inside of here. So we see the three
Pods that were just rolled out about a little bit over a minute ago, and we see that
app=hello-world-app is the label that's applied, but we have a new controller-
revision-hash for this particular version of our DaemonSet, and there we see that
Pod template generation equals 2. So that was incremented from the initial
deployment, which was 1, and now it's 2. So let's go ahead and clean up this demo
and move forward in the course.
Introducing and Working with Jobs
All of the controllers that I've introduced so far have the responsibility of starting
up Pods and running them continuously, in fact ensuring that they Always stay
online based on the type of controller that we're working with, whether it be a
deployment, a ReplicaSet, or a DaemonSet. But what if you needed to run just a
single task in your cluster, or you needed to run that single task periodically in
your cluster? And that's where two additional controller types come into play, the
Job and the CronJob. Jobs in Kubernetes have the responsibility of creating one
or more Pods. Now remember, Pods are just container-based applications that
run code, and so it's the responsibility of a Job to run a program in a container
until its completion. And it's the responsibility of the Job controller to ensure that
the specified number of Pods completes successfully. So there are some
workload examples where we can define that we want a multiple number of
completions or successful completions to execute within a Pod. Now how do we
determine success inside of a Pod's execution? Well, in the most basic ways that
we'll do that is with the return code from the program that is executed. If it
returns zero, success. Any non-zero value is considered a failure. Some workload
examples for Pods that are running inside of Job controllers include ad-hoc Jobs
that need to run periodically in my cluster. Perhaps I need to execute a task at a
specified period of time. I could also have a batch Job. Maybe I need to have
some sort of large processing job that needs to occur that executes and maybe
breaks up a larger type of workload into a smaller number of Jobs. And, of course,
data-oriented tasks. Maybe I need to move data from system A to system D
or execute a backup or some series of events that needs to occur at a particular
moment in time. It's the responsibility of the Job controller to ensure that Jobs
run to completion. And so, if something goes wrong during the execution, well,
the Job controller is going to react. Let's look at two different techniques that the
Job controller will use to ensure that our Jobs run to completion. Now first up is if
the Pod's execution itself is interrupted, and a primary example of this is if a node
fails inside of the cluster. If that's the case, then it's the responsibility of the Job
controller to reschedule that Pod somewhere else in the cluster. The other
scenario that we want to look at in the context of ensuring Jobs run to
completion is if the container-based application we're running inside of a Pod
managed by a Job controller returns a non-zero exit code, indicating execution
failure. For these events, we need to tell the container restart policy of the Pod
how we want it to react. The default container restart policy for Pods inside of
Kubernetes is Always, which is not compatible with the Job controller. It's
required that we define another type of restart policy, and our choices are going
to be OnFailure or Never. Using the OnFailure container restart policy, the Pod
restarts the container when our program has a non-zero exit code. And in this
scenario, the Pod isn't rescheduled. It still persists on the same node. It just
restarts the container to help make sure that our container-based application
succeeds if that's what we define as the restart policy. The alternative restart
policy is going to be Never where the container isn't restarted, and then the Job
is failed. The reason why the container restart policy Always is not compatible
with Jobs is because when a container-based program execution is completed,
the container in the Pod will shut down. And with Always set as the container
restart policy, it would simply start that container back up again. Well, if the Job
was successful in the first execution, this would clearly not be desired
functionality as our program would have already completed successfully. If you
want to look much more closely at container restart policy and how it
works, check out my course Managing the Kubernetes API Server and Pods
where we cover this in great detail. As we've been discussing, Jobs are tasks that
we need to ensure that run to completion in our cluster. Now, when a Job
completes successfully and it runs the task that we want and it returns an
appropriate exit value of zero, then that status for that Job will be set to
Completed inside of the Job object. The Job object is going to remain, and the
Pods associated with that Job object that were created won't be deleted. And
the reason for that is that we can keep these Pods around for their logs and
maybe some other output that's inside that container that we need to look at in
greater detail. Now, it's going to be up to us, the user, to ensure that we delete
the Job when it's finished. And then when we delete the Job, it will then delete
the associated Pods that were created by that Job. Let's look at the YAML code
that it takes to define a Job inside of a Kubernetes cluster. We're going to start off
with the apiVersion batch/v1. We're then going to define the kind as Job. And
then, of course, we'll need to give it a metadata with a name. In this case, it's
going to be hello-world. Now, inside the Job spec, we'll have a Job
template. Inside the Job template, we'll have a Pod spec for the containers that
we want to run in this Job. And for this Job, we're going to run an Ubuntu
container, specifically off of the Ubuntu image. Now the Ubuntu image is going to
be a container that we'll need to feed some additional information into, and so
we're going to feed in a command that we want to execute. In this case, the
command is going to bash, and we're going to execute that bash program with
the -c parameter, which allows us to call another program. In this case, we're
going to call echo, which is going to output some information about the Pod. And
the final attribute configured here is going to be the container restartPolicy,
which we're going to specify as Never. Now, we have to define a container restart
policy because the default container restart policy for Pods in Kubernetes is
Always, and that is not compatible with a Job type. We'll need to specify either
Never or OnFailure. Now, it's the responsibility of the Job controller to start up
a Pod that's going to start this container that's going to run that program to
completion. And if it's successful, then it'll mark the Job as successfully
completed. If it's not successful, then it's going to react with the defined
container restart policy, whether it be OnFailure or Never. In the event that it's
OnFailure, then it would restart that container. In the event that it was Never, it
would simply stop that Pod and mark it as failed. The Kubernetes gives us some
configuration attributes that we can use to help control our Job's execution, and
let's look at a few of those. First up is a backoffLimit. BackoffLimit is the number of
times a Job will be retried before it's marked failed. By default, a Job will create
one or more Pods. And if this Pod creation fails or these Pods fail, then it will be
retried this number of times, and it defaults to six. ActiveDeadlineSeconds
specifies the duration in seconds relative to the start time of the Job. The Job
can run for this duration before the system tries to terminate it. Basically, this is
the maximum runtime for a Job. Now, parallelism is the maximum number of
desired Pods a Job should run at a point in time. Now, this is useful for breaking
up larger sets of data into computable tasks where we can leverage parallelism to
help us complete those Jobs more quickly. Completions specifies the desired
number of successfully finished Pods that a Job should be run with. Basically,
how do we define a successful Job completion? For serial Jobs or ones that run
only one task or the Jobs that you want to run one task at a point in time, you'll
set this value to 1. For larger Jobs where you want to leverage parallelism, you'll
use this in conjunction with the parallelism setting. This will be the total number
of Pods you want to run to complete your task, and parallelism will be the number
of Pods you want to run concurrently.
Introducing and Working with CronJobs
When working with Jobs inside of Kubernetes, it's up to us to create and execute
those Jobs. But what if I needed to run a Job periodically or on some time-based
schedule? That's where CronJobs come in. CronJobs give us the ability to run a
Job resource at a given time-based schedule in our cluster. Now this is
conceptually similar to the UNIX or Linux CronJob that you might be familiar with
and uses the same format when I'm defining the schedule. Some example
workloads that we'll want to use CronJobs for are periodic tasks that need to
happen on scheduled times, perhaps backups, data movements, whatever it is
that we would need to run on some interval inside of our cluster. A CronJob
resource is created when the object is submitted to the API server by the
administrator. But at the time of execution or at the scheduled time that we
define inside of that CronJob, that's when a Kubernetes Job resource is going
to be created via the Job template, which is part of that CronJob object. It's
going to create that Job and then execute that Job to completion, just like it
would any other Kubernetes Job. Let's look at some of the configuration
attributes that Kubernetes gives us to help control CronJob execution. And first
up is schedule. This is going to be a cron-formatted schedule. Basically, when do
we want this Job to run and on what interval? Then there's suspend, which allows
us to pause the execution of a Job. We can set the suspend to true, and that will
then suspend subsequent executions of that CronJob. There's also
startingDeadlineSeconds. If after this number of seconds a Job hasn't started
yet, then don't start it, and mark that execution as failed. We'll still come along
and execute the Job again at some point in the future that's defined in the
schedule. Then there's concurrencyPolicy. ConcurrencyPolicy tells Kubernetes
how to handle concurrent executions of a Job, and there's three settings, Allow,
Forbid, and Replace. Imagine this scenario. You've defined the CronJob, and it
starts an execution. And within that, that Job is still up and running, and a
subsequent execution comes up because it's scheduled to do so. How do you
want Kubernetes to react? Do you want it to allow, in that case allow the
subsequent execution to run concurrently? Or do you want it to forbid and block
the execution and mark that Job as failed? Or do you want it to replace that Job
execution by killing off the previous Job and starting up this new Job? These are
the three settings that Kubernetes gives you to allow you to control how you
want it to react in those scenarios. Defining a CronJob in YAML for use in
Kubernetes can be a little bit interesting, so let's walk through this together so
that we can learn how to get this up and running in our cluster. And first up, we'll
define an apiVersion. In this case, it's going to be batch/v1. The kind is going to be
CronJob. And inside of metadata, of course, we'll give it a name, in this case hello-
world-cron. Now here's where things get a little bit interesting inside of the
spec, and let's walk through each one of these elements together. First up we'll
define a cron-formatted schedule. And so here we see a star, a slash, a 1, followed
by four stars, which means that this CronJob will stamp out a new Job every
minute for execution. What Job is it going to stamp out? Well, that Job is defined
in the Job template. Now this Job template is the same as the Job definitions that
we looked at earlier in this module. And so inside of here, we'll have a spec. And
inside of the spec, we'll have a Pod template. And inside of that Pod template,
we'll have another spec for defining the containers that we want to run inside of
the Job. And so inside of here, we'll go about our standard definition for the
containers or for the workloads that we need to run to execute inside of that Job.
Demo: Executing Tasks with Jobs
All right, so let's get into our demo about Jobs and CronJobs. We're going to look
at executing tasks with Jobs. We'll look at failed Jobs and container
restartPolicy. We'll learn how to define a parallel Job, so we can take a big Job
and break it up into smaller chunks, and then also how we can schedule tasks
with CronJobs. So here we are logged into c1-master1, and let's get started with
our first demo where we're going to learn how to execute tasks with Jobs. So, let's
go ahead and jump right into this job.yaml file and look at what it takes to define a
Job inside of Kubernetes. And so the first line there, we see apiVersion is going to
be batch/v1, the kind is going to be Job, and the metadata is going to have a
name of hello-world-job. Inside the spec, we're going to have a template that
defines the Pod template spec on line 7. Inside that Pod template, we'll have the
containers that we want to have run inside these Pods that are going to be
wrapped up in this Job controller. The name of our container is going to be
ubuntu, and we're going to launch the ubuntu image. And on line 11, we're going
to tell our ubuntu image to execute a specific command. In this case, it's going to
be bin/bash. We're going to parameterize that with -c and then tell it to run
the bin/echo command where it's going to run this string of text, telling us hello
from a particular Pod at a particular time. Now on line 15, we're defining our
container restartPolicy as Never. Our two valid values here are Never and
OnFailure. If we didn't explicitly define a restartPolicy like we have here on line 15
and we saved this and sent it into the API server, it would use the restartPolicy of
Always, which is incompatible with a Job. And at that time, when we'd submit that
into the API server, it would actually fail and submit an error back saying that
we were using an incompatible restartPolicy. So we have to set this to either
Never or OnFailure, and for this one, we're going to use Never. So let's go ahead
and move forward and send this manifest into the API server for creation and
jump down to line 11 here and do a kubectl get jobs --watch. We can watch the
phases of execution for our particular Job. So here we see hello-world-job start
up, and it has 0 of 1 completions required, and it's been running for about 2
seconds. And then in the next line, we see 1 of 1 completions, which means our
Pod started up, our container ran our command to completion successfully, and
then that Pod shut down. So let's go ahead and break out of here and get a
listing of Pods that have run in our cluster. So here we see I have a hello-world
Pod that was run, and it's not ready because no containers are up and running
inside of that Pod, so we see 0 of 1, but its status is Completed. And so we know
we had a good execution because we saw just a second ago that we've reached
the number of required completions which is 1 of 1. If we move a little bit
further, let's go ahead and use kubectl describe job hello-world-job so that we
kind of dig into the details of this particular Job's execution. Go ahead and scroll
to the top here, bring that into view, and there we can see hello-world-job for the
name, the namespace is default, and we have some selectors defined to help us
determine Pod membership to this Job. So here we can see the selector is going
to be controller-uid with that UID defined there. If we go down a little bit
further, we can see parallelism is 1 and completions as 1. So this Job only ran one
Pod to completion. We see a start time and a completed time to help us know
when it started and stopped and a duration of 4 seconds. Now important here we
see Pod statuses. We see 0 is running and 1 succeeded and 0 failed. So we know
one Pod started up and ran to completion and ran successfully. If we go down a
little bit further, we see the Pod template. In the Pod template, we see the labels
that will be assigned to any Pods created by this controller. So we see the
controller-uid and also the job-name associated as a label as well. There we see
our containers where we define ubuntu and then the image that we have up and
running and the command that we're going to execute. If we scroll to the
bottom, we see in the events that the Job controller successfully created a Pod
named hello-world-job cmn2f. So, let's go ahead and keep moving forward in our
demo and look at how we can actually pull the log from a particular Job so we
can see what happened inside the execution. That's going to be helpful if we
need to either debug or we're interested in the actual output of the Job that it
ran. And so I'm going to use the label here to get a listing of the Pods that were
created by this particular Job. And so we can use a label in combination with
a selector to pull that information out. So we'll say kubectl get pods -l where
we're going to define the label of the job-name=hello-world-job. So let's go ahead
and run this code here, and we get the output at the bottom here where we see
that Pod that was named ending in cmn2f. So I'm going to grab that, throw that
on the clipboard, and paste that right here and then run kubectl log and then the
Pod name. And here, we can see the output of that Pod's execution. So we see
Hello from Pod, the Pod's name, and the time of the execution. Again, this is a
very valuable technique if we're interested in the output of our Pods or
debugging information. So, since our Job is completed, let's go ahead and delete
that Job with kubectl delete job hello-world-job. Run that code there. That's
going to delete that. And then, in addition to deleting the Job, it's also going to
delete the Pods associated with that. So if I do a kubectl get pods, we'll see that I
have no Pods defined in the cluster.
Demo: Dealing with Job Failures and restartPolicy
All right, so let's keep moving forward and go into our second demo where we're
going to learn how Kubernetes reacts in failure situations when we're working
with Jobs. And so we're going to start off by looking at this job-failure-OnFailure
manifest that we've defined inside of this file. And so starting off just like we did
before, apiVersion, kind, metadata, and spec. Now inside the spec, I've defined a
backoffLimit of 2, which means, in this scenario, Kubernetes will start the Job. And
then if it senses a failure, it will create up to two more Pods to try to complete the
Job. And so we'll have three potential executions, the initial execution and then
the two restarts. If we go down a little bit further inside of here, we'll see that our
template is the same, so the Job template is similar to what we saw before, and
that our restartPolicy is set than Never. But I've injected an intentional error here
on line 15. Here, you can see bin/ech instead of bin/echo. This is going to cause
our application to yield a non-zero exit code and fail the execution of this Job. So
we swing back over to our script, let's go ahead and run this particular Job and
send that manifest into the API server and then quickly run down and do a
kubectl get pods --watch, and we'll kind of walk through the output at the bottom
here. So the very first line we see ContainerCreating. So the Job started up that
first Pod ending in 2w7wb. That immediately failed on the next line there, and
then Kubernetes killed that Pod. It then started to schedule another Pod, so we
see tskt8 in the status of Pending. That gets scheduled to a node, shifts into the
ContainerCreating status, and as soon as it creates that container, it errors out as
we see on that next line there where tskt8 has a status of error. Since we're using
a backoffloop of 2, we see another Pod get created ending in h784. It tries to start
up, it goes into Pending during scheduling, switches over to ContainerCreating
once it gets scheduled to a node. That Pod starts up its container, and it finds
that it can't find that command that was in our misconfigured Job template. That
errors out, and then things grind to a halt because we've reached the backoff
loop. So, let's go ahead and break out of here and kind of investigate what just
occurred. So, we have kubectl get pods. Let's go ahead and run this code. We can
see that we have three Pods that were created, the initial one and then the two
restarts, and those are all in an error status. If we do a kubectl get jobs, we can
see that right now we have zero completions for our Jobs, and our Job's name is
hello-world-job-fail. Now, if we jump into kubectl describe jobs, let's go ahead and
see what's happening inside of here. So let's jump down to Pod Statuses. We see
0 running, 0 succeeded, and 3 failed, and we saw that. We saw the initial
deployment fail and then the two retries fail. If we go down to the bottom here, we
can see in the events some pretty good information that tells us what
happened. We see the three creations of the first three Pods, and then eventually
Kubernetes gives up and says BackoffLimitExceeded. The Job has reached the
specified backoff limit. And then, it marks the Job as failed, and it's not going to
proceed anymore. So let's go ahead and delete that Job. And when we delete
that Job, it's going to delete all the Pods associated with it. So you can see if we
do a kubectl get pods, those are all gone as well.
Demo: Working with Parallel Jobs and Scheduling Tasks
with CronJobs
For our next demonstration, we're going to look at how we can define a Job that
needs to run in parallel, and so let's go ahead look at this ParallelJob.yaml
manifest and see how we can leverage parallelism to help us get a lot more work
done more quickly inside of our cluster. So starting off just like any other Job, we
have an apiVersion of batch/v1, a kind of Job, and a metadata defining the
name. Inside the spec, we'll see that line 6 and 7 are new. We have completions
and parallelism. And what completions is telling our Job controller to do is that it
needs to run 50 copies of this Pod and ensure that they run to completion. Now,
line 7 is telling the controller that, at most, it will run it in chunks of 10. So there
will only ever be 10 Pods running concurrently inside of our cluster. Now, the
remainder of the Pod template is going to look pretty similar to the initial
templates that we were working with inside of these Jobs. And so we have a
template, a spec, and then the containers defining what we want our Job to
do. So let's go ahead and jump back over to our script and send that into our
cluster. And now, if we do a kubectl get pods, then we'll see it starts off by
creating 10 Pods. And so right now, Kubernetes is going through and starting up
the workload in our cluster. And as we march through this, we'll see that some
have completed, and it moves on to creating the additional containers needed
to complete up to 50 completions running 10 at a time. If we want to, we can use
a watch where we go through and kind of use the traditional Linux watch
command where we're going to parameterize that with a kubectl describe. And so
if we look at Pod Statuses at the bottom there, we can see it's working through
the set, getting up to 50 successful completions. So two more left, and there we
go. Our Job completed just a few seconds ago. So, let's go ahead and break out
of here and go back into seeing what Kubernetes did. If we do kubectl get jobs,
we can see that we have 50 completions, and it took about 41 seconds to do that
work. Now, let's go ahead and delete that Job and move forward and talk
about scheduling Jobs with CronJobs in Kubernetes. So, let's go and take a peek
at this manifest, the CronJob.yaml, and learn how we can use this to define
scheduled workloads in our cluster. So the apiVersion for this is going to be
batch/v1beta1. Kind is going to be CronJob, and I'm giving it a name of hello-
world-cron. In our spec, we're going to define a schedule of */1, which is going to
run a Job every minute from this CronJob. If you go down further, we can see the
Job template is the same Job template that we've been using throughout these
demonstrations with our Hello from Pod echo command. So, let's go ahead and
switch back over here. Send that into the cluster to be created to schedule that
work. If we do a kubectl get cronjobs, we can see that we've successfully created
this CronJob in our cluster. We have a name of hello-world-cron. We can see the
schedule executing every minute in a cron-formatted schedule and that its
suspend value is set to False. So this is not suspended. This is an active
ConJob. Now, ACTIVE there in that next column is the number of Jobs that are
up and running that are controlled by this particular CronJob. We also see LAST
SCHEDULE, which is the last scheduled execution. Right now, no CronJobs have
been kicked off yet, and so we have a value of none there. So hopefully by the
time I run this, we'll have a Job that runs. So let's go ahead and run this a few
more times, and there we can see we had an execution. So 1 active, so 1 is running
right now, and it was scheduled about 3 seconds ago. And so let's go ahead and
look a little closer at the CronJob with kubectl describe cronjob. Inside of here,
we see the name is defined as hello-world-cron. We can see the schedule there
and that the Concurrency Policy is set to Allow. We're using the default value
there. We can see Suspend is False, and the other values associated with this
particular CronJob are set to unset. If we go down a little bit further, we can see
our Pod template. And at the bottom here, we can see Events. And in Events, we
can see that the CronJob controller successfully created a Job named hello-
world-cron and then an identifier on the end there. And then it also observed
that it saw a completed Job. So we see SawCompletedJob for the particular Job
that started up. So the process is going to be we schedule the CronJob, the
CronJob creates the Jobs, the Jobs ensure that those Pods run to
completion, and then the CronJob observes that that specific Pod completed its
execution. And if we do a kubectl get cronjobs again, we can see that the last
time that a Pod was scheduled was about 22 seconds ago. If we do a kubectl get
pods --watch, we can watch the lifecycle of these Pods coming and going. So
here we can see a Pod ending in cs28r and then another Pod ending an
hn5fw. There we see another Pod get scheduled. It goes from scheduling
Pending to ContainerCreating and then to a status of Completed. And so, let's go
ahead and break out of here. Now the question I'm going to ask is, well, how long
do these Pods stay around for? Because if I just do a kubectl get pods and run
this code here, you can see that these Pods are kind of hanging around, the one
ending in cs28r, hn5fw, and so on. These are all getting created by the
CronJob, which is going to then create the Job, which is then going to create the
associated Pod. Well, how long do these Pods stay around for because we could
actually start consuming some resources inside of our API server if we left all
these Pods laying around. Well, I'm going to show you exactly how long they do
stick around for. If we do a kubectl get cronjobs -o yaml and run that code
there, inside of here, we can see the YAML definition of our CronJob. And its
definition, we see a successfulJobHistoryLimit of 3. So this is great because now
it's kind of self-cleaning up after executions. It's going to keep three remaining
Pods around so that we can go back and look at those if we need to look at the
logs or whatever other information we need out of the individual Pod. So they're
not going to live forever. They're going to live about this long or through three
subsequent executions. We can increase or decrease this based on our
needs. Now, let's go ahead and delete that CronJob when we're done. And that,
of course, will also delete the Pods associated with that CronJob. So, when we
delete the CronJob, the Pods will go away too.
Introducing StatefulSets
The final controller type we're going to look at in this course is the
StatefulSet. Now recall, we're just going to introduce StatefulSets
conceptually, and we're going to look at the implementation of StatefulSets in a
future course. StatefulSets enable stateful applications to be managed by a
controller in Kubernetes, and some example workloads of stateful applications
include databases, caching servers, and application state servers for web
farms. Let's look at StatefulSets and the capabilities that they provide for running
stateful applications inside of Kubernetes. In Kubernetes, when a Pod is
rescheduled, it's a completely new Pod every time. For stateful applications, we
need to have the ability to have a Pod be rescheduled in a cluster and have it
come back in the cluster and maintain its state because, remember, no Pod is
ever redeployed. It's always a completely new Pod. So if we decouple application
configuration and application state from the Pod lifecycle, we can have a stateful
applications inside of Kubernetes. And the way that it's done is based on
persistent ordered naming, persistent storage, and headless services, and let's
walk through each of these individually. In terms of naming, we need to provide
unique persistent naming identifies for Pods running in the StatefulSet. This is
often needed by persistent state applications, like databases, because they
might need to know precisely where data is located in a collection of Pods
supporting a database application. Next up is storage. Pods and StatefulSets will
need to have persistent storage such that they can store their data in a known
location and be able to get back to that at a future point in time. And then
finally, headless services. Headless services are services in our clusters that
don't have load balancers or even cluster IPs and give our stateful applications
the ability to use cluster DNS to locate each other by name. Again, kind of
going back to that concept of data locality and knowing where it exists in the
cluster because those persistent state applications might need to know exactly
where a piece of information is on a particular Pod with a persistent name.
And leveraging cluster DNS, it can help locate those resources inside of the
cluster based on their names. We'll be diving deeper into StatefulSets in
an upcoming course on storage. But for now, I wanted to introduce the concepts
to round out our discussion of controllers in Kubernetes.
Module Review and Thank You!
All right, so here we are at the end of the module, and we looked at working with
other types of controllers in Kubernetes. We learned how we can leverage
DaemonSets to run Pods on all of the nodes in a cluster or a subset of nodes. And
we learned how we can leverage Jobs and CronJobs to complete tasks or
to complete scheduled tasks inside of our clusters, and we learned the
core concepts behind StatefulSets and how we can use those to deploy
stateful applications in our Kubernetes clusters. So here we are at the end of our
course, and I really hope you enjoyed listening to this and that we've laid the
appropriate foundation for your Kubernetes studies. We've covered a lot of
ground so far together and discussed many different types of controllers and
their use cases in Kubernetes. We looked at deployments and how we can use
those to maintain application state and scale our applications in our clusters, and
we also looked at how we can leverage other controller types like DaemonSets,
Jobs, CronJobs, and StatefulSets to round out our capabilities to deploy various
types of workloads in Kubernetes. It's truly been a pleasure recording this course
for you, and I thank you for listening and, most importantly, learning with me.
Thank you so much. I hope you enjoyed the course, and join me again soon here,
at Pluralsight.