Certified Kubernetes Administrator:
Using kubeadm to Install a Basic Cluster
Course Overview
Course Overview
Hi, everyone! My name is Anthony E. Nocentino, Enterprise Architect and
Founder of CENTINO SYSTEMS. Welcome to my course, Certified Kubernetes
Administrator: Using kubeadm to Install a Basic Cluster. Are you a Systems
Administrator that needs to build and administer Kubernetes clusters? If so, then
this is the course for you. In this course, I will introduce you on how to build
clusters using kubeadm. We'll look at system requirements, dive deep into the
installation process, and then build a basic cluster together using kubeadm. By
the end of this course, you'll know the system requirements for Kubernetes,
cluster design concepts, you'll have a deep knowledge of the installation process,
and you'll also know how to build a basic cluster using kubeadm. Before
beginning this course, you should be familiar with Kubernetes and
containers' architectural concepts and be familiar with the Linux
operating system and administering at the command line. You should also have a
firm understanding of TCP/IP based network. I hope you'll join me to continue
your journey to learn Kubernetes in the course Certified Kubernetes
Administrator: Using kubeadm to Install a Basic Cluster here at Pluralsight.
Using kubeadm to Install a Basic Cluster
Module Overview
Hello, this is Anthony E. Nocentino, and welcome to my course, Using kubeadm to
Install a Basic Cluster, part of the Certified Kubernetes Administrator learning
path. In this course, you'll learn how to deploy a Kubernetes cluster
using kubeadm and some basic operation fundamentals. Let's get started. Let's
take a look at what we're going to cover in this course. First up, in this
module, we're going to start off with some installation considerations. Basically,
what you need to know before you install Kubernetes. Then we're going to look at
the installation overview. And after that, we're going to dive deep into the
process of how we actually bootstrap a Kubernetes cluster. And once we have all
of that, we'll sit down and we will learn how to install our first Kubernetes cluster
together with kubeadm.
Installation Considerations
Let's start off this module with discussing some installation considerations. What
this boils down to is where you're going to install Kubernetes. And first up is the
cloud. And here there are really two major use cases when deploying Kubernetes
in the cloud. You can deploy Infrastructure as a Service virtual machines, and
then deploy a Kubernetes cluster on top of that. With IaaS-based deployments,
the networking, the hypervisor of the infrastructure isn't something you have to
worry about, but you do have to worry about the operating system, patching it,
and then installing and maintaining Kubernetes itself as software on those virtual
machines. And then there's PaaS offerings, or Platform as a Service
offerings. Kubernetes is available to you as a managed service and all of the major
cloud providers. You could simply go ahead and consume Kubernetes as a
service, and you don't have to worry about maintaining that underlying
infrastructure, patching operating systems, or even maintaining the installation of
Kubernetes in your cluster. That's all handled for you by your cloud
provider. Another deployment option for Kubernetes is on-premises. You can
install Kubernetes on bare metal physical machines or using virtual
machines. Now that leaves us with one giant question. Which one do you
choose? Well, that's really dependent on a couple of things. What I like to think is
that it's dependent upon the skill sets of the organization and the strategy of the
organization. If you and your teams are cloud-ready and you're already in the
cloud and you're moving forward as fast as you can, well, yeah, that makes a lot of
sense to deploy in one of the cloud offerings, perhaps as an IaaS or as a PaaS
offering. But if you want to stay on-prem, that's fine, too. Again, it goes to the
skills and the strategy of the organization. Take these things into consideration
when you're working out your installation considerations for Kubernetes. Now, this
course is going to be about the installation and configuration of Kubernetes, and
so we're going to focus a lot on installing Kubernetes manually ourselves in
virtual machines.
Installation Methods
Now, let's look at some installation methods for how we can get Kubernetes up
and running. First up is desktop installations. A desktop installation of Kubernetes
is great for development environments. It's just playing around to learn how to
work with Kubernetes. Primarily, I use Docker Desktop for Mac, but I just want to
experiment with things when I'm teaching workshops or when I just want to kick
the tires inside of the Kubernetes platform rather than using a full-blown
installation or some managed service in the cloud. There is also a desktop version
of Kubernetes for Docker for Windows as well. The installation method that's
become the standard for installing and bootstrapping a Kubernetes cluster is a
tool called kubeadm. This is a package that you can install, and with
kubneadm, you can bootstrap a cluster and get it up and running in a very fast
way. This is the installation method that we will use in this course. And then
finally, as we introduced a second ago, there are cloud scenarios where we can
deploy either an IaaS or PaaS offerings in the various cloud providers. Do we want
to just consume it as a service, or do we want to get things installed on top of
virtual machines? So, lots of different ways to get access to Kubernetes. So go
ahead and experiment with one of these, but in this course, we're going to focus
on installing on virtual machines in our local on-prem system using kubeadm.
Installation Requirements
When we're installing Kubernetes on bare metal, or like we're going to do in this
course, on virtual machines, we have some system requirements that we want to
sort out before we get things up and running. And the first thing is you need
Linux. And we're going to focus on Ubuntu virtual machines in this course, but
certainly compatible with RHEL or any of the other major Linux distributions.
Windows worker nodes are available, but that topic is going to be out of scope for
this course. You'll need two CPUs in your system, as well as 2 GB of RAM. This is
the bare minimum to bring a cluster up and running in your lab. If you're sizing a
cluster for production workload, you'll need the appropriate resources to support
your application workload in your cluster. Next, you need to disable swap on your
system, and I'll show you how to do this in an upcoming demonstration. Swap has
been supported since Kubernetes version 1.22, but in this series of courses, we're
going to go with swap disable. In addition to the base system requirements that
we just looked at, you'll need a container runtime, and you will need a container
runtime that's compatible with the container runtime interface or CRI. Currently
supported is containerd and CRI-O. For this course, we'll walk through the
installation of containerd and build a cluster with that as our container runtime
for our demonstrations. From a networking standpoint, we'll need network
connectivity between all of the nodes in our cluster. Additionally, we'll also need
to ensure that each system has a unique host name and also a unique MAC
address.
Getting Kubernetes
So we've gone over the high-level installation scenarios, and we've gone through
the system requirements, but what we haven't talked about is where do we
actually get Kubernetes from? Well, Kubernetes is maintained on GitHub. And so
if you go to github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes, here's where you'll find the living
and breathing Kubernetes project. So honestly, if you're up for it, you can go
ahead and contribute to this project yourself. It's a very, very active and vibrant
community. In addition to just the raw software that's available on the
website, there is a ton, I mean, a ton of deep dive documentation available for you
to learn how things work at the deepest level. In fact, if you're up for it, you can
go read the code yourself. Now for this course, and for most of the production
systems that I support, I use the Linux distribution repositories, both yum or apt,
depending upon which Linux distribution I'm using. In this series of courses, we'll
be using Ubuntu. And so we're going to get Kubernetes from an APT repository
Building Your Own Cluster
Now that we have the software in our hands, it's time to learn the steps that we
need to take to build our first Kubernetes cluster together. And, well, step one is
to install and configure a container runtime and the Kubernetes packages. Today
in this course, we're going to learn how to install Kubernetes packages and use
containerd as our container runtime. Then once we get the packages installed,
we need to create a cluster. What this means is using kubeadm. We're going to
bootstrap that first control plane node and get those critical cluster components
up and running. Things like the API server, the controller manager, etcd, and so
on. With the control plane node up and running, we then need to configure
our pod networking environment. In this series of courses, we're going to use an
overlay network for pod networking in our cluster. Once we have our pod network
up and running, we can then join additional nodes to our cluster as worker nodes
that we can use to run our application workloads on. Let's look at some of the
required software packages that we need to install to get started working with
our first Kubernetes cluster. Again, we're going to be using Ubuntu in this series
of courses, so that means they'll be using the app package manager for package
installation. First up, we need to install a container runtime, and we're going to use
containerd in this series of courses. But as we discussed a moment ago, in our
upcoming demo, we'll go through the process of installing and configuring
containerd together. Next up is the kubelet. The kubelet is a thing that's going to
drive the work on the individual nodes in our cluster, and that comes from a
package named kubelet. Now, there's also a package kubeadm or kube-admin. It's
a tool that's responsible for bootstrapping our cluster and getting all the cluster
components up, running, and configured. And it's also the tool that'll be used to
join additional nodes to our cluster. And then finally, there's kubectl, or kube
control, or kube-"cutl," whatever you want to call it, but it's the primary
command-line tool that we're going to use to administer our workloads in our
cluster. Now, I do want to call out that you will install all four of these packages on
all of the nodes in your cluster, regardless of if they're going to be a control plane
node or a worker node.
Installing Kubernetes on VMs
Now, let's go ahead and look at the sequence of commands that we need to use
to get and install Kubernetes on some Ubuntu virtual machines. And I do want to
point out that we want to do this on all of the nodes that we're going to have in
our cluster, both control plane and worker nodes. First up, we need to install our
container runtime. On an Ubuntu system, we'll do that with apt-get install
containerd. Then when we get into the demos, we'll have some additional
configuration steps that are needed to configure containerd to use the systemd
C group driver. The next thing that we're going to do is we're going to add the
GPG key for the apt repository where the Kubernetes packages live. Then we're
going to execute this sequence of commands here to add the Kubernetes app
repository to our local repositories lists. Now don't worry about writing this all
down or taking screenshots. This will be available to you in the course
downloads. We're going to do this in an upcoming demonstration together. I do
want to point out that where I have that version variable, that would need to be
updated for the version of Kubernetes that you want to run, and at the time of
this recording, it's 1.29. A working example of this will be shown in the upcoming
demos, and I'll keep the course downloads updated with the latest tested version
for this course. Now, with the repository installed, we need to tell apt to update its
package list, and we can do that with apt-get update. And then we'll use apt-get
install to install the three remaining required packages, the kubelet, kubeadm,
and kubectl. Now, here's where we're going to deviate from the normal Linux
package installation process. What we're going to do here is we're going to mark
these packages with apt-mark hold for the four packages that we just
installed. The reason for this is that we no longer want apt to maintain the
upgrading of these packages. We're going to want to service these packages
outside our normal security updates for the system so that we can control when
we move between versions of Kubernetes independent of security patches. This
is needed because Kubernetes has a defined upgrade process when moving
between versions,. We're going to cover that process in a course later in the
series.
Lab Environment Overview
We just looked at the code level detail to install Kubernetes on some Ubuntu
virtual machines. So let's zoom out a little bit now and look at the lab environment
that we're going to use in this course and the remainder of the courses in the
series. And so here you can see we have one control plane node and three worker
nodes, and so that's going to be the topology of the cluster that we're going to
construct together in the upcoming demonstrations and use throughout this
series of courses. What we're going to have here is we're going to have kubectl
installed onto the control plane node, and so we're going to drive all of our work
from that particular node when we work with our cluster. The version of Ubuntu
that I'm using in the lab for these virtual machines is Ubuntu 22.04. Now, as
versions of Kubernetes change and versions of Ubuntu change, I will continue to
update the code into the course downloads to ensure that they work with the
latest versions of Kubernetes and Ubuntu. If you experience any issues, please
reach out to me via email. Now, for our lab virtual machines, my virtual machines
are VMware Fusion VMs. You can use pretty much any hypervisor that you want
as long as you have full network connectivity between all of the nodes in your
cluster. The minimum CPU requirements are 2 vCPUs, and you'll need at least 2
GB of RAM in each of these virtual machines. Now, I was a little generous with the
virtual machines from a disk space standpoint because, honestly, that's a little bit
harder to change than any of the other attributes in a VM. And so I've allocated
100 GB on each of the nodes in the cluster. Now, for these virtual machines, I'm
going to go with a disabled swap, and I'm going to show you how to configure
that in some upcoming demos. Now, I have all of the host names set for each of
these individual nodes in a host file on each of the virtual machines with the
corresponding names and IP addresses so I don't have to rely on DNS for
name resolution between these virtual machines. And now as for host names, here
we go, c1-cp1 for cluster 1, control plane 1. And the IP address that I'm using in my
lab is going to be 172.16.94.10. You can use whatever IP scheme you want to use in
your lab. Next up is c1-nod1, so pretty easy naming convention that we're going
with here. And its IP address is going to end in .11, then c1-node2, ending in .12, c1-
node3 ending in .13. And so that's our cluster, a control plane node, and three
worker nodes.
Demo: Installing and Configuring containerd
All right, it's taken us a long time to get here, but it's time to do our first demo
together. In this demo, what we're going to do is we're going to install
containerd, kubelet, kubeadm, and kubectl. And then once we have those
packages installed, we're also going to look at some systemd units for these
packages to understand how they operate with the underlying systemd
system. For our demos, I'm going to use the VS code, and then what I'm going to
do is at the top of the screen, I'm going to highlight the code that I want to
run, and we'll see the output at the bottom of the screen so we can see both the
command and its output at the same time. I've also deployed the four virtual
machines that we just looked at in the presentation portion of the course and
have an SSH connection into c1-cp1. Let's get started. All right, so here we are
logged into c1-cp1. And the first thing that we're going to do here is go ahead
and check on the configuration of our swap file. And we can verify if our swap is
turned off or on by using the command here on line 14, sudo swapoff -a, so when I
run that code there, if I get no output, then we know that our swap is
disabled. How do I disable the swap? Well, that's what I did inside of our fstab. So
I'm going to go ahead and open up /etc/fstab, and you can see in the output at
the bottom here, I've commented out the line for our swap config by putting that
hash mark in the front. So I go ahead and save that out and I reboot the
system, that's going to disable our swap file. Now, what they want to call out is it's
possible that this configuration is going to change. This is the second version of
this course that I've recorded for Pluralsight, and this particular installation
sequence has changed many times. I will always keep the course analysis up-to-
date with the latest method. And so knowing that, let's look at how we can install
both containerd and our Kubernetes packages in this demo. So the first thing
that we need to do before we install containerd is to configure some operating
system prerequisites. We need to load some modules and some sysctl
parameters. And so that's what we're doing here on line 26. There's a here doc
that's going to add the overlay and br_netfilter modules to the startup of this
system. And we're going to need those at runtime right now, and so that's what
I'm doing here on lines 31 and 32. I'm loading those modules in our system. Once
those are loaded, I also need some sysctl parameters defined. So let's go ahead
and run this code here on line 35 to configure those, and then on line 43 to load
them into memory right now. That first line there being a here doc that's going to
put them into k8s.com, which will persist across reboots, and on line 43 here, the
sysctl parameters, loading them right now in demand, so they're available to us
for this installation. With those prerequisites set, it's time to install containerd, and
that's what we're doing here on line 47, sudo apt-get install -y containerd, we'll
run that code there, and I'll begin the containerd installation process. And then
once that's completed, let's go ahead and configure containerd. The first thing
that we need to do is make a directory for a configuration file in /etc/
containerd, and that's what we're doing here on line 51. Once we have that
created, we'll use the command containerd config default to generate a default
configuration file. So here on line 52 we can see just that, sudo containerd config
default. It's going to generate a configuration file that we're going to pipe into
sudo tee and write a configuration file out in/ etc/containerd/config.toml. Run
that code there, and we'll have that configuration file created. With the default
configuration file created, what we need to do now is make one adjustment to
that file so that we load the SystemdCGroup driver. And so on lines 60 through
64, we can see the insides of those files here in our code, and on line 64, we see
SystemdCGroup = true. Well, the default is false, and so to change that real easily
I have a set command on line 67 that will swap false to true for you. So once you
run this code here on 67, we'll have the appropriate configuration in our
containerd configuration file. We want to verify that change is made on line 71. We
use grep to see if that value is changed in a file, and there in the output at the
bottom, we see SystemdCGroup = true. So now that's properly configured, we do
need to restart containerd, and we'll do that here on line 75 sudo systemctl
restart containerd.
Demo: Installing and Configuring Kubernetes Packages
So now that containerd is installed and configured, it's time to configure our app
repositories for the Kubernetes repositories and install the required packages for
Kubernetes, so kubeadm, kubelet, and kubectl. The first thing that we'll do is
we'll install some required packages for this process. So on line 82, I have apt-get
install, apt-transport-https ca-certificates, curl, and gpg. Once those are
installed, now it's time to get the k8s.io apt repository gpg key and install that
locally on a machine so that we can trust the repository. On line 83 we have that
code, and I want to call out in the middle of that code v1.29. If you recall in the
presentation portion of the course, add a variable there, version. Well, here is an
example of version 1.29. This will likely change over time as Kubernetes
releases come about, next one being 1.30, and so on. So, update that to the latest
and greatest version that you want to work with, and I'll keep the course, update
it, and test it against those newer versions. So for today, we're going to use 1.29. So
let's go ahead and run this code here to get that apt repositories gpg key and
have that trusted locally. Once that's done, on line 87, we'll now configure that
apt repository in our local repositories. And again, the same pattern. In the
presentation portion of the course, I had a version variable here, and on the code
here on line 87, we see v1.29. So let's go ahead and run this code here to add
that repository to our local repository's lists. So with that repo trusted and now
configured, let's go ahead and update our package metadata on this particular
host with sudo apt-get update. And once that's completed, I want to take a
second to look at the available versions of the Kubernetes packages that are
available for us, and we'll look specifically at the kubelet. So when I run this code
here on line 92, what that's going to do is output all the possible versions of
kubelet that are available to me. So in the output at the bottom, we see 1.29.0,
1.29.1, and 1.29.2. Well, those are the particular versions of Kubernetes that are
available to us to install. And so what we're going to do next is install a specific
version on our system. I'm going to install version 1.29.1. And that's what we have
here on line 98, I'm defining a variable, 1.29.1-1.1, so that exact package version that
we see listed in the output at the bottom. And the reason why I'm doing this here
today is in future courses, we're going to upgrade to a newer version of
Kubernetes. And so this way in the sequence of demos that work through in this
course, you'll have a version to upgrade to later. And so let's go ahead and run
this code here on line 98 to populate that version variable. And on line 99, what
we're going to do is we're going to install the exact versions of our softwares. And
so walking from left to right, looking at the code, sudo apt-get install -y
kubelet=VERSION, kubeadm=VERSION, and so on for kubectl. And that's going to
install those exact versions of those packages for us. Once that's completed, we'll
use apt-mark hold to hold those packages on these particular versions. And so
we update the system software with apt-get upgrade to maintain the security
patches and so on. For our system, these particular packages will always stay on
the versions that they're at right now. We'll look at upgrades later on in an
upcoming course. Now, if you want to install the latest and greatest Kubernetes
packages, I have the code here on lines 104 for you to do just that. So now that
we have everything installed, let's look at our systemd units. I want to look at two
specifically, the kubelet and containerd because I want you to know the state
that they're in right now before we bootstrap our cluster. Because all we've done
so far is just install the packages. And so sudo systemctl status kubelet.service.
Run that code here, and I want to call out in the output here, we can see that the
unit is loaded, and then it's enabled, and the preset is set to enabled. So when
the system reboots, the kubelet will automatically restart. I do want to call out
that in the active field, we see that it's inactive (dead) because we have not
bootstrapped our cluster yet. There's no workload on this particular node for that
kubelet to be active. And in an upcoming demo, we'll look at what that looks like
once we've bootstrapped our cluster. And so now that we know that inactive
(dead) is the correct state that we want to be in in this phase of our
installation, let's look at the status of containerd. We can do that with sudo
systemctl status containerd. Here, containerd is up and running and active, and
we see that there in the output active running. It's also set to enable, so when
this system reboots, containerd will automatically restart. So let's go ahead and
break out of this output here and clear our screen. And so that's a wrap for this
demo where we've installed containerd and the required packages for
Kubernetes.
Bootstrapping a Cluster with kubeadm - Control Plane
Node
With the software packages installed, it's now time to start the process of
bootstrapping or creating a cluster with kubeadm. Kubeadm is a tool that we can
use to manage the process of creating our cluster. It's going to walk through
various phases and build and configure our cluster for us, and right now we're
going to walk through each one of those phases together so that you know
what's really going on during the creation of a Kubernetes cluster. Now, to
Bootstrap a cluster at the command line, you'll type kubeadm init, and that's
going to begin the process of creating your cluster. The first phase is pre-flight
checks. What kubeadm is going to do for you here is execute a series of
checks that will help ensure a successful cluster creation. So things like ensuring
that you have the right permissions on the system that you're working with. It's
also going to pull the container images of the various parts of the control plane,
which are going to run as pods on the control plane node. It's also going to verify
that you have the appropriate system resources on your server in terms of CPU
and memory, and another important pre-flight check that it executes is, is there a
container runtime on this system, and is it up and running? If any of these checks
fail, kubeadm will report the error and stop the cluster creation process. The next
thing that kubeadm does for you is creates a certificate authority for
you. Kubernetes uses certificates for both authentication and encryption, and
we're going to look very close at this in an upcoming slide. In the next phase,
what kubeadm does is it generates kube config files for you for the various
cluster components of Kubernetes so that they can locate each other on the
network and authenticate against the API server. We're also going to look at
these very closely in an upcoming slide. The next phase is generating static pod
manifests. Static pod manifests are going to be generated for each of the control
plane pods. What's going to happen here is they're going to be created and
stored on the local file system in a location that the kubelet monitors. And if the
kubelet finds a pod manifest there, well, it's going to start up the pods that are
defined in that manifest. We're going to look at this in the upcoming slide, and
we're also going to look at this deeply in an upcoming demo. Now, after the static
pod manifests are generated, kubeadm waits for the control plane pods to start
up and get running, so the API server, etcd, and the controller manager, and so on
will all be started up as pods on our control plane node. Now what kubeadm will
do is taint the control plane node. And we discussed this a little bit when we
looked at pod operations in a previous course in the series. What this means is
when Kubernetes schedules pods, it will never schedule user pods onto the
control plane node. It will only ever schedule system pods to run onto the control
plane node. Now, kubeadm goes on to generate what's called a bootstrap token. A
bootstrap token is used for joining additional nodes to the cluster. And now in
the final phase, kubeadm will go on to start up the add-on pods, so things like
DNS and also the kube-proxy pod. The process that we described here is the
default process if you just use kubeadm init with no parameters. This
bootstrapping process is very customizable, and you can build more complex or
customized clusters using kubeadm command-line parameters, or even a YAML
configuration manifest to describe your cluster's configuration.
Understanding the Certificate Authority's Role in Your
Cluster
It's time now to zoom in on those facets of the kubeadm in a process that I called
out a second ago, and we're going to start the conversation with the Certificate
Authority. Kubeadm init by default will create a self-signed Certificate Authority
for you. If desired or perhaps required in your organization, you can tell kubeadm
init to integrate with an external PKI, or public key infrastructure. The Certificate
Authority that's created by kubeadm is used to secure cluster
communications. It's going to generate certificates that are used by the API
server to encrypt the HTTP stream that is the API server's communication
protocol, so that's going to be HTTP over TLS, or, in other words, HTTPS. In
addition to securing cluster communications, the Certificate Authority is used to
generate certificates for the authentication of users and cluster components, like
the Scheduler, Controller Manager, and the kubelets to authenticate the request
to the API server. So we'll have strong authentication methods for users that have
to operate the cluster, any of the cluster components, and also for the kubelets
on the nodes in our cluster, since each of these things use the certificates
to authenticate and verify their identity. The Certificate Authority files are going
to be stored in /etc/kubernetes/pki on the control plane node and will
be distributed to each node in your cluster when you join additional nodes to
your cluster using kubeadm init. This distribution process ensures that the nodes
trust the self-signed Certificate Authority. For more information on how to control
or customize your kubeadm in a process, check out this link here. This article
includes many of the customized parameters for kubeadm init, including
specifying external PKI configurations.
kubeadm Created kubeconfig Files and Static Pod
Manifests
Next up in our deep dive into the kubeadm init process is kubeadm Created
kubeconfig files. What a kubeconfig file is is a configuration file that defines how
to connect to your cluster API server. Inside a kubeconfig file, you're going to find
the certificates used for client authentication, and you're also going to find the
API server's network location, usually its IP address, or a DNS name. Often
included in a kubeconfig file is the CA certificate of the CA used to sign the
certificate of the API server. This way the client can trust the certificate
presented by the API server. Kubeadm creates a collection of kubeconfig
files, and those live in /etc/kubernetes. And let's look at each one of those
kubeadm Created kubeconfig files now. The first one that's generated is
admin.com, which is a Kubernetes cluster administrator account, essentially a
super user inside of a Kubernetes cluster. We're going to use this to authenticate
to our cluster today. There's also a super-admin.conf, which is a special account
that can be used to completely bypass the authorization layer in your cluster. This
is a break glass in case of emergency thing if your authorization layer is
broken. Kubeconfig files are also generated for the controller manager and
the scheduler to tell each of these control plane components where the
API server is and which certificates you use to authenticate to the API server
with. On your control plane node, you'll also have a kubeconfig file for the
kubelet, kubelet.conf. This is used to locate the API server and present the correct
client certificate for authentication. These kubeconfig files are generated by
kubeadm and are used by these components to locate and authenticate to the
API server. Later in a series of courses, we'll look at how to create kubeconfig files
for users to locate and authenticate to the cluster, and we'll also learn how to
set appropriate permissions for those users. Now let's take a closer look at what
kubeadm init does for us with static pod manifests. A manifest describes a
configuration, and in this case, it's going to describe the configuration of a
pod. And so what kubeadm is going to do, it's going to generate static pod
manifests for us for the control plane components that it needs to bootstrap
a cluster and get it up and running. These static pod manifests are going to live
in /etc/kubernetes/manifests, and it's the job of kubeadm init to generate a static
pod manifest for the core cluster components, and that includes etcd, the API
server, the Controller Manager, and the Scheduler. And so kubeadm init
generates the static pod manifests for each of the control plane pods, and they
live in that special directory. It's the job of the kubelet to watch this directory on
the file system, and for any static pod manifests it finds in this directory, it'll start
up the pods described in those manifests. And in this process here, it's the
control plane pods. This is how a cluster starts up after a reboot as well. The
kubelet starts by the systemd daemon on the node on boot. And then when the
kubelet finds the manifests in this directory, it will start up the control plane pods
defined in those static pod manifests. Now, you might be thinking, why do we
need this special configuration to start up these pods? Well, this is what enables
the start up of those core cluster components as pods, well, without a cluster up
and running.
Pod Networking Fundamentals
That wraps up the conversation about kubeadm init and the closer look at its
various phases. Now let's shift the focus over to the last thing that we need to talk
about before we actually stand up our Kubernetes cluster, we're going to talk
about pod networking. Let's say we're designing the cluster. We have the
requirements of the Kubernetes networking model that we introduced earlier in
the series of courses. We need to ensure that we have a single un NATed IP
address per pod and that all pods and all nodes have reachability between each
other. Now, we could, of course, configure direct routing. And in this case, we
need to configure our networking infrastructure underneath our pods and nodes
to support the full IP reachability between these pods and nodes without NAT
using real IP addresses. And sometimes that's just not feasible. Perhaps you're in
a cloud scenario, or you're in a scenario where you don't have control over the
underlying infrastructure, and that's where overlay networking comes in,
sometimes called software-defined networking. With overlay networking, what
happens is we get the appearance of a single layer 3 network that all the pods
can communicate on. And some of the techniques that are used to make this
happen include tunneling and encapsulation of those IP packets. And it will be
the responsibility of the overlay network to facilitate for the communication of
those packets between the pods in an unchanged way. Now, some of the overlay
networks that are available to us include Flannel, Calico, and Weave Net. These
are overlay networks, each of which have different capabilities and features that
may be interesting to you as you deploy your overlay network. In our demos
today, we'll be using Calico for our pod network. When deploying a pod, it will
provide the IP address management for the pods deployed. It's imperative that
the network address ranges that you choose not overlap with any other networks
in your network infrastructure. So work with your network engineering teams to
find an appropriate address range to use for your pod network. For a full
discussion of overlay networking, I encourage you to check out this link
here. You'll find many more overlay networks available and other networking
solutions that you can use for your pods and nodes so that they can all
communicate together. This discussion here is really just scratching the surface
for what you need to know about networking to get a cluster up and running,
and we will have several courses dedicated to K and it is networking coming up in
this series of courses.
Creating a Control Plane Node
With all the preliminaries out of the way, it's time to check out the code to use
kubeadm to bootstrap a control plane node in our Kubernetes cluster. The first
thing that we need to do is to download a YAML manifest that describes our pod
network that we want to deploy, and that's going to be calico.yaml. This is the
actual deployment manifest for the pod network, and inside that file is where
you'll specify the pod network IP address range. We'll look how to configure that
in our upcoming demo. I also want to call out that if this URL changes, I'll update
the course code downloads with the new URL. The next thing that we need to do
is to execute kubeadm init, kicking off the kubeadm init process that we just
walked through together. Once kubeadm init finishes, all the control plane pods
will be up and running. Kubeadm init will also print out the commands and
parameters needed to join additional nodes to your cluster, and it will also print
out how to configure a kube/config file for an administrative user. We're going to
dive deep into the join command in a moment later on in this module. But for
now, let's look at how to work with the kubeconfig file for our administrative
user. The following steps will enable your currently logged in user to perform
administrative functions on the cluster. And the first thing that we'll do is we'll
create a directory for our kube/config file in our regular user's home directory. And
then we'll copy the admin.conf kube/config file from /etc/kubernetes into that
directory in our home directory. And then we'll adjust permissions on that file so
that we can access this account with our current user. This kube/config file
allows our currently logged in user to perform administrative functions on the
cluster, and inside that kube/config file, you'll find the required certificates to
authenticate to the cluster, and the network location of our clusters API
server. The final step that we need to take after creating our control plane node
with kubeadm init is to deploy a pod network, and we can do that with kubectl
apply -f calico.yaml. This will read the deployment manifest file that we just
downloaded, send it into the API server, and create the pod network in our
cluster. Once the pod network is finished, our DNS add-on pods will start up, and
we'll have a fully functioning control plane node.
Demo: Creating a Cluster Control Plane Node
Now, let's get into a demo and look at how we can create our first Kubernetes
cluster together. Once that cluster is up and running, we're going to deploy a pod
network, and then we're going to look at those systemd units again to see what
changed from the last time when we installed the kubelet and how it's going to
react differently now that we have a cluster up and running because of the static
pod manifests created by kubeadm init. Then we're going to look at those static
pod manifests from our control plane pods. Let's get started. All right, so here we
are logged in the c1-cp1, and let's get started with the process of creating our
control plane node. The first thing that we're going to want to do here is to
download the manifest for our pod network, and that's the code I have here on
line 8. That's going to use wget to retrieve that calico.yaml manifest from the URL
specified. Now, next thing we will do is we're going to crack open that file with
them and look inside this file for a string, CALICO_IPV4POOL_CIDR. So let's go
ahead and hop down into the output at the bottom. We'll search for that
string. And here in this commented code, you can see the value
192.168.0.0/16. That's the default IPv4 CIDR range for the pod network. We're
going to go with this default in our configuration today, but make
that modification as appropriate to your network infrastructure. So let's go ahead
and break out of them here, and go on next to the code on line 18 where we have
sudo kubeadm init, which is going to bootstrap our cluster. We're specifying a
specific version of Kubernetes here, as we did in the previous demonstration
when we installed the Kubernetes packages. We're installing 1.29.1. Specifying the
version here will allow you to upgrade to another version when we get to that
course into the series, and so the parameter, --kubernetes-version v1.29.1 is the
version that we're going to run inside of this cluster. So let's go ahead and run
this code here together to kick off the bootstrap process. Now, we walk through
this process in great detail in the presentation portion of course, and so what
we'll see in the output at the bottom is the kubeadm init process walking through
each of those phases. So there at the bottom, we can see it's doing the pre-flight
checks. And at this moment in time, it's actually pulling the container images for
each of the control plane components from the appropriate container
repository. All right, now with that completed, let's scroll up and look at some of
the output in the kubeadm init process, so we can see it as it walks through each
of the different phases of the kubeadm init process. So there we can see at the
very first line init using Kubernetes version 1.29.1, which is what we specified in
the command-line parameter for the kubeadm init process. It goes through the
pre-flight checks. Then we can see in the next phase here, it's creating the CA
certificate. Going and generating the CA certificate and key and then generating
the certificates for each of the control plane components, API server, etcd, and so
on. Going down a little bit further, we can see the phase where it creates the
kubeconfig files for each of the kubeconfig files that we talked about in the
presentation portion of the course, and those are going to be saved in /etc/
kubernetes. At this point in time next, it goes and starts to create the static pod
manifests, writing those out to /etc/kubernetes/manifests and getting one
of those for each of the control plane components, API server, Controller
Manager, and so on. At that point in time, those are written into the static pod
manifest folder. The kubelet is then watching for those files to be written, and
then we'll begin to start up that process of booting the control plane pods, and
here we can see wait-control-plane while it's waiting for those pods to pull the
container images and then start those pods up. Go down a little bit further. We
then see the bootstrap token get generated, which will be used for other nodes
to join this cluster. And then finally, we see the add-on pods, CoreNDS, and kube-
proxy get applied configuration, so those will be available for us in a little bit .In
the output here, this is what you want to look for when you bootstrap your
cluster. Your Kubernetes control plane has initialized successfully. Then we see
the output to copy admin.conf into our home directory for the kubeconfig so that
we could authenticate the cluster. And we also at the bottom here see the
command to join any additional worker nodes to the cluster. We're going to revisit
that in an upcoming demo. But for now, let's go ahead and move forward in this
demo. So, I do want to point out that if you do want to run a newer version
of Kubernetes and not specify the one like we did here, you just omit the
Kubernetes version parameter. And that's the code that we have here on line
22. Now, moving forward, let's go ahead and copy admin.conf into our local users
kubeconfig file, and that's the code that I have here on line 30 through 32. So
let's go ahead and run that to create the .kube directory in our home
directory. We'll then copy admin.conf out into our .kube directory, and then apply
the appropriate permissions to access that file. And so now we have the ability to
run kubectl commands with administrative privileges against our cluster. And
that's what we're going to do here on line 37 and deploy our pod network with
kubectl apply -f and specify in calico.yaml, which is the pod manifest, for our pod
network. At the bottom there, you can see deployment.apps/calico-kube-
controllers created, and a bunch of other resources created. So now that's going
to go ahead and create the pod network in our cluster, and we're going to move
forward and check the status of that deployment, and we can do that with
kubectl get pods, specifying --all-namespaces, which will show us all the pods
running in our cluster, even system pods. At the bottom here, we have a whole
collection of pods that I want to walk you through. So this is the first time we're
seeing the output of a kubectl get pods. And we've created a bunch of system
pods, or control plane pods, and also our pod networks pods. And so let's look at
the output at the bottom here. So from left to right, we define the
namespace, which is kind of like a folder to hold resources in our cluster. They
made the resource name, we have a column READY, which defines if the
containers in the pod are up and running, and then the actual status of the
pod. And so we see a couple of them are container creating and a couple of them
are running. So everything's kind of getting started up at this point in time. We
see if there were any container restarts, and also the age of the resource. Now
we'll walk through this output to look at some of the pods. At the bottom there,
we can see our control plane pods. We see kube-apiserver-c1-cp1. That's our API
server's pod running on our control plane node, c1-cp1. We have a pod for
controller-manager, we have a kube-proxy pod, and we also have a scheduler
pod. Looking at the other pods in a list, there we see /etc, the CoreDNS, pods and
the Calico networking pods on our control plane node. Let's go ahead, and if you
want to, when you're running this command, if we do kubectl get pods --all-
namespaces, if you want to see the pods kind of with a watch or like a tail, if
you're familiar with that concept, we see that the pods are all up and running, but
as they change state, this would update this output here for us in our
cluster's output for our kubectl get pods command. So, repainting the screen as
the pod's state changes. So it's going to break out of that with Ctrl+C. We see
that all of our pods are up and running. We can confirm that again with the
kubectl get pods. So once you see this state, we can move forward. All of the
pods are up and running, both the control plane pods and our pod networking
pods. At this point in time, if we do a kubectl get nodes, we want to check the
status of our control plane node. And it's a very important part here before we
move forward is that the status is ready. We can see that in the output at the
bottom. Reviewing all of the output, we see the node name, c1-cp1, which is our
control plane node. We also see that its role is control-plane, and it's been up
and running for about 6.5 minutes, and its version is 1.29.1. So now we have an up-
and-running functioning control plane node with a pod network deployed.
Demo: Examining systemd Units Again and Static Pod
Manifests
I want to take a few minutes now to review systemd units again. In our previous
demonstration, we saw that the status of our kubelet was inactive and dead. If I
go and I ask for the status of our kubelet now with sudo systemctl status
kubelet.service, if I look at the output, now we see active and running. And the
reason for that is our kubeadm init process created those static pod manifests
and wrote them into the directory that the kubelet was watching. Once the
kubelet so that those static pod manifests were there, it starts up, starts up those
control plane pods, and there we have our control plane pods up and
running. And if we reboot our system, that same process happens again. The
systemd daemon starts up the kubelet service. it looks in the watch directory, and
reads out those static pod manifests, starting up the control plane pods on
reboot. And let's look at those static pod manifests in /etc/kubernetes/
manifests. And so if I do a directory listing on that directory, what we'll see inside
of there is a static pod manifest for each of the control plane pods' components.
From left to right there, we see etcd, kube API server, kube Controller Manager,
and kube Scheduler. And so this is the directory that the kubelet watches for the
static pod manifests. If we look inside one of those static pod manifests with the
more command, and we'll look etcd.yaml, inside of here, we can see the
configuration of this particular pod. And so we see things like the API version, the
kind is a pod. If we go down a little bit further, we'll see the pod spec, which is the
way to define the configuration of a pod. And so these are all the configuration
elements of etcd. We'll cover all of these details later on in another course where
we talk about the maintenance and backup and restore of etcd. But for now know
that this is where this configuration lives. And similarly on the API server, if we
look at kube-apiserver.yaml, we also see the configuration of the API server in
here. So let's look at some of this code for our API server. And so that's going to
define things like the container image and also its configuration. Again, we'll dive
into much more detail into that in an upcoming course. The final thing I want to
call out to you in this demo here today is where the kubeconfig files live for the
control plane pods, and that's going to be in /etc/kubernetes. So there's our
admin.conf, which is our cluster administrator. We have a Controller Manager, we
have our local nodes kubelet config, we have our scheduler.conf, and also our
super-admin.conf. And so this is the directory where all these kubeconfig files live
for the various components of our control plane node. And so that's a wrap for
this demo. We've gone ahead and successfully bootstrapped a control plane
node, deployed a pod network, and we checked out where a couple things live
inside of our node in terms of static pod manifests and kubeconfig files.
Adding a Node to Your Cluster
Nodes or worker nodes are where your user workloads will run in your cluster. To
join a node to a cluster, you will first install the required Kubernetes software
packages, so your container runtime, which in our case is containerd,
kubeadm, kubelet, and kubectl. We then use kubeadm with the join parameter
to start the process of joining a node to a cluster. Kubeadm join takes some
parameters, such as the network location of the API server, a bootstrap token
used to join a node to a cluster, and also the CA cert has to trust the certificate
presented by the API server when kubeadm connects to that API server. We're
going to look at some example code of this in a second. We then execute
kubeadm join on the node that we want to join to the cluster. What's going to
happen is the node is going to download the cluster information and cluster
configuration metadata, then it's going to submit what's called a certificate sign-
in request, or a CSR, into the API server to generate a certificate, which will be
used by the kubelet on the node that we're joining to the cluster. This is used by
the kubelet to authenticate to the API server. The CA is going to automatically
sign that CSR in that certificate request, and then kubeadm join is going to
download that certificate and store that on the file system of the soon-to-be-
joined node. That certificate is going to live in /var/lib/kubelet/pki. Kubejadm join
is then going to generate a kubelet.conf kubeconfig file for the kubelet in etc/
kubernetes on the node. Inside that kubeconfig file is a reference to that client
certificate that was just created and downloaded and the network location of the
API server that we want to authenticate against for the cluster that we want to
join this node to. The code for kubeadm join looks like this, kubeadm join, and
then the DNS name or the IP address support of the API server, which in our lab is
172.16.94.10 on port 6443. The next parameter is the bootstrap token. This is
effectively a time ticket or password for joining a node to a cluster. The next
parameter is the ca-cert-hash. The ca-cert-hash is used here to establish a
certificate chain of trust between the node joining the cluster and a
certificate presented by the API server for HTTPS requests. In our last demo, you
saw how kubeadm init prints this command and the required parameters to
screen, and you can use that to join additional nodes to your cluster. But what do
you do if that code goes away? Well, in our upcoming demo, I will show you how
to use kubeadm to generate the entire join command on-demand so that you can
use that information to join additional nodes to your cluster.
Demo: Adding a Node to Your Cluster
All right, so let's get into a demo and learn how to join a couple of nodes to our
new cluster. All right, so here we are logged into c1-cp1. In this demo, what we're
going to do is we're going to join a worker node to our existing cluster. And the
first thing that we need to do is to log into our worker node with SSH. So that's
what we're doing here on line 2, we're logging into c1-node1. Now recall our
cluster is comprised of a control plane node, and it will have three worker nodes.
We're going to install and configure one worker node here, c1-node1. You'll go
ahead and install c1-node2 and 3 on your own later on in this exercise. And so
let's go ahead and get started with configuring the base OS and installing the
Kubernetes packages on this worker node. And so the first thing that we'll need
to do is to confirm that our swap is disabled. And when I run swap off -a and get
no output, that is the case. If I need to make a modification, I'd hop the DFS tab
here and make the modification to disable the swap. Now, let's go ahead and
move forward and configure the required modules for Kubernetes. That's what
we're doing here on line 16 through 19 with the here doc. And we'll load those two
modules at runtime right now with the code on lines 21 and 22, and jumping
through this networking configuration here on 25, configuring these networking
parameters on boot. With that here doc and then the code on line 32, they'll load
those right now into the system. So now that we have the base OS configured, it's
time to install containerd with sudo apt-get install -y containerd. And then once
that's installed, we need to make the configuration change for
the SystemdCGroup driver. That installation is finished. Let's go ahead and make
our containerd configuration directory. We'll go ahead and generate that default
configuration again with containerd config default. That's going to generate
config.toml in our /etc/containerd directory. Just like we did before, we'll need to
configure the SystemdCGroup driver in that config file, the code on line 56,
swaps that out with the set command by setting the value from false to true. And
before we move forward, let's confirm that that change was made with the
code here on line 60, and it sure is. And at the bottom, we can see
SystemDcgroup = true. Now that that's installed and configured, we'll restart
containerd to make that configuration change take effect. So on this worker
node, we also do need to install the Kubernetes packages, and that's what we
have in this part of our demo here. We'll install some additional required
packages, such as apt-transport-https ca-certificates curl gpg. We'll then install
the k8s.io apt repository gpg key into our local key ring, and remember to update
that version, the 1.29.2, whichever version it is that you're working with. With the
gpg key installed, we'll go ahead and add that repository to our local repositories
list, and we'll update our package metadata with apt-get update again. If you
like, you could browse the available versions of the Kubernetes packages
available with apt-cache policy, but we did cover that in our previous demo, so
I'm going to jump ahead here. We still want to specify the exact version of
Kubernetes we want. And for this demo, I'm using 1.29.1, and so we'll load that
variable here on line 86, and then we'll install the required Kubernetes packages
and the specific versions with the code apt-get install -y kubelet, kubeadm, and
kubectl specifying a version for each one of those packages. With the packages
installed, let's go ahead and move down in the demo a little bit. And of course, if
you want to install the latest and greatest, you would just omit the version
parameter, and the code for that is on line 93. Before we move forward, let's make
sure that kubelet and containerd are in the appropriate states before we move
forward with joining this node to the cluster. And we'll check the systemtctl
status of kubelet.service, and it's in the inactive and dead state, which is good.
And it's also enabled, which means when the system restarts that the kubelet will
start automatically. And then similarly, I want to check containerd before we
move on to make sure that it's active and running, and in the output at the
bottom, we can see that it is, and also that it's enabled, and it is as well. It's going
to break out of this output at the bottom and move forward. So we're logged into
c1-node1. We installed some packages. We also configured some operating
system parameters. Let's log out of c1-node1 and back into c1-cp1. Back on c1-
cp1, I can use the command kubeadm token create --print-join command
to generate the join command to join our node to this cluster. And so it's going to
take this code at the bottom here, and put that into our clipboard because we're
going to need that to paste into our worker node. So let's go ahead and SSH back
into our worker node now because we want to execute that command on the
worker node to join it to the cluster. On line 118 here, I'm going to take the
command that we just generated and overwrite this command here. I'm going to
format that so you can read it a little more easily. Put a new line there, and we'll
also put a new line there. And so walking through this code from top to
bottom, we have sudo kubeadm join, the IP address of our API server, 172.16.94.10,
and the port 6443. On the next line, we have the bootstrap token. And on line 120,
we have our ca-cert-hash so that we trust the certificate presented by the API
server. So we'll take this code, we run this code on c1-node1, and it's going to join
c1-node1 to our cluster. Now, in the output at the bottom, we see it go through
the various phases of the join process. We see the pre-flight checks, and we also
see in the output that the certificate sign-in request was sent to the API server,
and a response was received. So it's exchanged that information, and then
it's configured the local kubelet on the system with the appropriate information
to join the cluster. So now let's go ahead and log out of c1-node1 back into c1-cp1,
and we'll check the status of our nodes, and we can do that with kubectl get
nodes. So what we see here is that c1-cp1, which is our control plane node, has a
status of ready, and then we see our worker node, c1-node1, that has a status of
not ready. The reason the node is currently in the not ready status is because
the pod network hasn't finished deploying to this node yet. What's happening
behind the scenes is that the containers are being pulled from their container
registries and the pods that support the pod network are still starting up. Once
that completes, the node's status will change to Ready. You can use the --watch
parameter to pull the status of kubectl get pods to see the status of the pod
network pods' deployments, and it'll update as things change. Running that here,
you can see that they're now all up and running and ready. And so if we check
the status of our nodes with kubectl get nodes, you can see here that it's
transitioned to Ready. And so that's how you join your first node to your
cluster. Go ahead and perform the same exact steps into this demo on c1-node2
and c1-node3 in your cluster to get everything up and running. This cluster will
be the foundation for the remaining courses in the series, so go ahead and get
it all sorted before moving on to the next course, please.
Module Summary and What's Next!
All right, so here we are at the end of the course, and we covered a lot. We looked
at some installation considerations to learn what you need to know before you
install Kubernetes. Then we looked at the installation overview and we dove deep
into the bootstrapping process for a Kubernetes cluster. And then we did several
demos where we learned how to bootstrap a cluster and join nodes to a cluster
using kubeadm. All right, so here we are at the end of the course, and I hope your
Kubernetes learning journey is going well. In this course, we dove deep into how
to install Kubernetes using kubeadm, and we finished up using kubeadm to install
a basic cluster with a control plane node and three worker nodes. Before moving
on to the next courses, you should complete this course and have your cluster up
and running with that one control plane node and the three worker nodes. Well, I
sure think we're off to a good start, and I hope you do, too. Please join me in the
next course where we'll get started using your newly built cluster in the course
Working with Your cluster. Thank you for watching!