Certified Kubernetes Administrator:
Working with Your Cluster
Course Overview
Course Overview
Hi, everyone! My name is Anthony E. Nocentino, Enterprise Architect and
Founder of CENTINO SYSTEMS. Welcome to my course, Certified Kubernetes
Administrator: Working with Your Kubernetes Cluster. Are you a systems
administrator that needs to build and administer Kubernetes clusters? If you do,
then this is the course for you. In this course, I'll introduce you to the primary CLI
tool for managing workloads in a Kubernetes cluster, kubectl. And we'll also look
closely how to deploy workloads in a cluster both imperatively and
declaratively. By the end of this course, you'll know how to efficiently manage a
Kubernetes cluster at the command line, understanding key scenarios like
discovering API resources, executing containers, and how to get deep dive
configuration and logging information out of resources deployed. You'll also learn
how to deploy workloads both imperatively and declaratively, and learn how to
quickly generate YAML manifests at the command line. Before beginning this
course, you should be familiar with Kubernetes and containers architectural
concepts and be familiar with the Linux operating system and administering it at
the command line. You should have a firm understanding of TCP/IP based
networking and understand the fundamental concepts of containers. I hope you'll
join me to continue your journey to learn Kubernetes in the course Certified
Kubernetes Administrator: Working with Your Kubernetes Cluster here at
Pluralsight.
Working with Your Cluster
Introduction, Course, and Module Overview
Hello, this is Anthony Nocentino. Welcome to my course, Working with Your
Kubernetes Cluster, part of the Certified Kubernetes Administrator learning
path. In this course, it's time to sit down, roll up your sleeves, and start working
with our Kubernetes cluster. Let's get started. We're going to break this course
down into two big chunks, and we're going to start off with using kubectl to
interact with our cluster. And then we're going to look at some basics on how
application deployments work in our cluster.
Introducing kubectl
Kubectl, kube-"control," kube-"cuttle," take your choice, it's the primary cli tool for
controlling workloads in your Kubernetes cluster. Now, what we're going to use
kubectl for is to form operations against our cluster. Basically, we're going to
create, read, update, or delete pretty much any kind of resource in
Kubernetes. Now remember, in Kubernetes, everything goes through the API
server. And so kubectl is your primary way to interact with the API server at the
command line. So anytime you need to make a new thing or query something
or make a modification to an existing object, this is the primary CLI tool for doing
just that. You're going to perform operations against resources, the API objects in
Kubernetes. So using kubectl is how you're going to manipulate API objects like
pods, deployments, and services, amongst many others. And so we're going to
perform operations against resources. And then, finally, the other facet that we're
going to look at today is using kubectl as controlling its output. If there's output
from the commands that we're executing, this is going to define the format that
we're going to get that output in. And so perhaps you want to have a more
detailed format with additional attributes being exposed, or maybe you want to
print output as a particular file type such as JSON or YAML. You can do all of this
with QC TL.
Using kubectl - Operations
We're going to start our deep dive into how kubectl works with the operations
that you can perform or really what you want to do in your cluster. And so let's
jump right in and talk about these core operations that you'll likely use at the
command line with kubectl every day, and the first up is going to be kubectl
apply/create. Apply and create are the primary operations for sending
deployments and the creation of resources into the API server. Next up is kubectl
run, kjubectl run allows you to start a single bare pod, which is a pod that's not
managed by a controller, and specify a container image, so basically
bootstrapping the most basic pod configuration. Now, my favorite command is
kubectl explain, Kubectl explain gives you the documentation for API resources,
and what this does is it'll show you the documentation for a particular Kubernetes
object or resource, listening to the description and the fields needed to construct
that object. And so this is a very valuable command when you work at the
command line learning how API objects are constructed. Kubectl combined with
delete will delete a specified resource, and then there's kubectl get. What
kubectl get will do is display the basic information about the specified
resource. And so far in this learning path, we've looked at nodes and pods in our
cluster, and we're going to be using this plenty more as we get into more
advanced topics. Now, let's look at describe. Describe gives you detailed
information about resources deployed in your cluster, and this is used to display
very detailed information about that resource and is extremely valuable in
troubleshooting scenarios when you're working with Kubernetes resources, and
we'll look at this much more in an upcoming demo. And then there's exec. Exec
allows you to run a command inside a container, a pod very similar to Docker
exec. And then finally, logs. Logs, allow you to view the logs that are written to
stdout from a container running inside of a pod. Very useful for troubleshooting
issues with your applications running inside of containers inside of pods. Now, like
I said in the beginning, this is a short list of what I think are the most
critical kubectl operations just to get you started. There is a huge list available to
you here at the documentation page for kubectl, and I strongly encourage you to
check that out there.
Using kubectl - Resources
When you're working at the command line, you're going to combine kubectl with
an operation like the ones that we just introduced a second ago with a
resource. Basically, what do you want to perform that operation against? And
we've introduced things like nodes and pods and services, and honestly, there
are many, many more objects available to you inside of Kubernetes to work
with. And so at the command line, we'll perform operations on
resources. Now, here you can see in parentheses an alias that represents a
particular resource type. So nodes (no), pods (po), services (svc). This is a good
way so that we can get more efficient at the command line when executing
commands. You can refer to deployed resources by using their alias to
shorten things up at the command line. There's a huge list of resources that are
available to you, and you can check out this link here for that. But I'm going to
show you some techniques at the command line where you can discover
resource names and resource aliases because I want you to get very efficient at
the command line without having to go back and refer to the documentation to
get things done and we'll do just that in our upcoming demonstration together.
Using kubectl - Output
The final thing that I want to look at today with kubectl is modifying its output. We
can modify kubectl's output by adding additional flags to our commands. The
first format that I want to introduce you to today is side. Using the wide option, we
can specify that we want kubectl to output additional information about
resources that have been deployed in our cluster. We could also output our
Kubernetes resources as YAML and JSON. The YAML and JSON formats are the
core of how Kubernetes describes things declarative, giving us the ability to
describe our configurations in code. And we can use kubectl to output YAML or
JSON, and this is a very valuable way to get configuration data out of our clusters
and describe the resources that have been deployed in our clusters. We can
persist these to file and exchange that with other system's down
level environments and other developers if we need to. The final output option
that I want to introduce you to today here is a dry-run. When combined with the
YAML output modifier, you can use this to generate YAML for a resource that you
want to create in your cluster. But dry-run doesn't create the object in the API
server. It just outputs the YAML for that object. And this is a great tool for quickly
generating YAML for resources that you want to create. So for things like
deployments and services and so on. We'll see this in action later in this module.
If you want to dive deeper into these output options, check out this link here.
Working with kubectl
So let's bring all that together and learn how we can use kubectl at the command
line. When we're sitting at the command line, we can use the command kubectl,
and we'll specify a command. In other words, the operation. That's the thing that
we want to do. Then we'll specify a type or a resource, the thing that we want to
do it to. And if we need to, we could specify individual named object. And then, of
course, are the optional flags that we can append to any command. And so let's
look at an example together. If we do something like kubectl get, that's the
operation, against the pods, which are the resources, and then if we need to get
information about a particular pod, well, we could append that on. So, kubectl get
pods would list all of the pods in a default namespace, and kubectl get pods pod1
would give you the information about just that particular pod. And then I can
append on some optional flags. And so if I wanted the output as YAML, I could
append --output=yaml to do just that. Now, one of the commands that I want to
show you is kubectl create, and what I want to create, well, in this case, I want to
create a deployment, which is the resource. I'll need to give that deployment
name, go ahead and call it nginx, and then I can specify an image, and this is how
we can do a basic deployment at the command line using kubectl. Now I'm going
to throw two links at you here. One for the reference documentation and the
other for a cheat sheet for using kubectl, and I strongly encourage you to check
these out. They're fantastic resources, and you might find a small piece
of information in there that could be useful to you to get through a scenario more
efficiently or easily than you're doing today. So go ahead and check out these
two links here. Very good resources.
Demo: Using kubectl get
So let's get into a demo, and we're going to look at using kubectl. We're going to
use kubectl to work with some nodes, pods, and other API resources. I'm also
going to throw in a treat for you here. I'm going to show you how to configure
bash auto-completion. So you don't have to remember all of the syntax
and shortcuts for kubectl or even resource names. And so here we are logged in
c1-cp1, our control plane node. And the first thing we're going to do is use kubectl
cluster-info to list and inspect the cluster that our cluster context is pointed to. In
other words, what cluster our kubectl command is going to communicate
with. And so I do that with kubectl cluster-info, execute that command, and in the
output at the bottom there, we can see the Kubernetes control plane is running
at https://172.16.94.10 on port 6443. That's the API server for the cluster that we
built together earlier on in the series of courses. Now, one of the most common
operations that you'll use for kubectl is kubectl get. So let's go and start that here
with kubectl get. What are we going to get? Well, the resource here is going to be
node. So, kubectl get-nodes. Running that code together, and we could see in
the output at the bottom there, we have a couple columns of information to look
at. We have the name, the status of our node, the role that it plays in our
cluster, the age or how long this resource has been deployed, and then the
version. So let's walk through the output there together. So we see in the name
column one for each of the nodes in our cluster. So, c1-cp1, c1-node1, 2, and 3. For
the status, you could see that the status of the kubelet on that node is
ready, which means this is up running and ready for workload. We can see the
role for the first one there is control plan for c1-cp1. That's the control plane
node. Now, for the remaining worker nodes, we can see that the role is none. Then
the age, 53 days, and the version, v1.29.1. That's the version of Kubernetes
running on that node. Now up next, we can add the output modifier -o wide to
get additional information about a resource. And let's go ahead and do that for
kubectl get nodes -o wide. We can get additional information about each cluster
node in our cluster. And so in the output at the bottom, we see the first five
columns, NAME, STATUS, ROLES, AGE, and VERSION. But we also now have some
additional information about our cluster nodes. We have the internal IP
address. So there we see for the first one, c1-cp1, 172.16.94.10. There is none for
external IP because these particular nodes don't have an external IP address in
our lab configuration. We see the OS image is Ubuntu 22.04.4 LTS, the kernel
version, and also the version of the container runtime. So here we can see
containerd 1.7.2. Now up next, let's look at some pods to see what's running in our
cluster. And if I do a kubectl get pods, we can see that it says no resources found
in the default namespace because we don't have any user resources deployed in
the default namespace, which is what kubectl get pods will list, we execute that
command. But as we learned earlier in a previous course, there are some pods
that are up and running in our cluster in what's called a namespace, which is kind
of like a folder or way to group resources together. In our cluster here, if we do
kubectl get pods --namespace kube-system, we'll see a listing of the system pods
that are up and running in our cluster. And so in the output here, we can see
things like kube-apiserver, kube-controller-manager, etcd, coredns, and all the
networking pods associated with this particular cluster. And so we can get a
listing of pods for all the system pods by adding --namespace kube-system. Now,
in this output, we also see the name, we see the status is ready, so that means
one container is up and running and ready inside this particular pod where we
see 1/1. We can see the status is running. We can see restarts is 2 because as the
system booted up about 62 minutes ago, the containers in those pods had to be
restarted. And then the age of those resources is 53 days. That's when they're
deployed into this particular cluster. Moving forward, we can ask for additional
information about each pod by adding the -o wide output modifier. So here we
have kubectl get pods --namespace to get all of those system pods, adding on -o
wide, let's go ahead and run that code together and see what we get. Well, we
have those first five columns again, NAME, READY, STATUS, RESTARTS, AGE. We
also have some additional information. We actually have the pod's IP address,
some of which are on our pod network, and some of which are exposed to our
external network. We could also see the node that that pod is running on. So if
you look at kube-apiserver, we could see that's running on c1-cp1. We can also
see that there's a kube-proxy pod running on each node in our cluster. So there
we see kube-proxy on c1-cp1, c1-node1, c1-node2 and 3. We see NOMINATED
NODE and also READINESS GATES in the output here. Don't worry about those
for now; we'll cover that later on in this series of courses. One thing that we
commonly do when I walk up to a cluster is I might need to look around and kind
of discover just kind of everything that's running in there and see what's going on
inside of the cluster. And we can ask kubectl to do that for us. We can say kubectl
get all. So we're specifying the resources as all, so anything that's running in the
cluster. We combine that with --all namespaces, and what that will do is list all
resources across all namespaces in the cluster. And so we'll get a lot of
information in this output. And so I want to pipe that into more so we can view
that page by page. Let's go ahead and run this code together. And we can see in
the output at the bottom, we have the namespace, we have the name, we have
READY, STATUS, RESTARTS, and AGE, just like previous outputs. But looking a
little closer, if we look at the NAME column, we can see that the resource type is
at the beginning of the string there. So we see pod/ and then the pod name
itself. If we go and page through the output, after we get past pods, we'll see we
also have some services that are up and running in our cluster, some daemon
sets, a couple deployments, and some replica sets with different types of
resources that are up and running in our cluster. And don't worry, we'll learn
about all these resources throughout this series of courses. But for now, just
know that you could use this command to list everything that's running in your
cluster, kubectl get all --all namespaces.
Demo: Discovering Resources and Documentation at the
Command Line
So moving forward, let's go ahead and do some discovery. I want to show you
how to find things at the command line in terms of what's available to you from a
command and a documentation standpoint at the command line. And so we can
ask Kubernetes for all the resources that it knows about, or basically the things
that I can deploy inside of the cluster. And so I can say kubectl api-resources and
then pipe that into more. And this will give me a listing of all of the resources or
objects that I have to work with inside of the Kubernetes API. And so let's look at
some of the output here from left to right. We see the NAME of the resource, we
see SHORTNAMES, or aliases. We see the APIVERSION, which is the v1 API. We
can see if a resource is NAMESPACED or not. And then finally, the KIND, or the
object type in the REST API. So let's look at these a little bit more closely. In the
NAME column, if you look down, we see nodes. We see its shortname or its alias is
no. Its APIVERSION is v1. And we see NAMESPACED as false, which means this
particular type of resource can't be placed into a namespace. And finally, we see
KIND, right, which is node. Now, some other resources can fall into a
namespace, and so let's look at one of those. We see pods for the name,
shortnames is po, v1, namespace true, type pod. And so generally speaking,
whether resource is namespaced or not, I like to think of it as physical things, like
nodes and storage, like persistent volumes generally aren't going to be
namespaced. Things that are user workload or system pods, things like that,
generally fall within a namespace. So let's go ahead and break out of this output
here and look at how we can use an alias. And so I can do kubectl get no rather
than nodes, and it executes the command, like it says kubectl get nodes, but I
saved a few keystrokes there. And we can see in the output at the bottom there a
listing of the nodes running in the cluster. So back on to kind of the discovery
elements of how we can find things. One of the ways that I like to find objects
very quickly in that listing of resources for API resources, just plain old grep. And
so what we can do here is to kubectl api-resources, pipe that output the grep, and
very quickly find the things that I want to find inside of all the resources that are
available to me in the cluster. And so once I have a resource like pods, maybe I
want to dig a little bit deeper and learn how to configure that resource in much
more detail. And that's where one of my favorite commands, explain, comes in. I
can do kubectl explain, then the resource name in this case is pods, and I'll pipe
that output to more. In this output, I get a real deep dive description, or, in other
words, the documentation, about this particular resource, a pod. And so let's look
at some of the output here. We see kind is pod, version is v1. We see a
description, a pod is a collection of containers that can be run on a host. We also
see the configuration fields, like this is very important how to construct a pod in
terms of the API requirements for our Kubernetes API. And so let's go ahead and
look at some of those. So bringing that into view, we see FIELDS apiVersion. We
see kind, which is the string value representing the REST resource for this
particular object, which is going to be pod. We see metadata, which is the
description of the pod. And then the actual spec, which is the configuration
elements or the technical details about a pod and its status. And so these are all
the top-level details for an individual resource. But maybe I need to know
more. Maybe I need to dig into what a pod spec looks like. And I can do that by
executing the command that looks like this, kubectl explain pod.spec. And so now
what I have is the next level of detail for that API object, in this case, a pod,
describing a little bit deeper about the configuration details of a pod spec. And
so what we have here is the kind, pod, version, v1 again. The description,
specification of the desired behavior for a pod. Going down into the fields here
are those more detailed configuration elements, we can see things like affinity, or
containers, and dnsConfig. And I want to call out that you see Containers, we see
a required string there. That tells you that this is required as part of a pod's
definition. And so there we see containers, which can be an array of containers, a
list of containers belonging to this pod. And so let's go ahead and break out of
this output and dig a little bit deeper and look at kubectl
explain pod.spec.containers. Digging into that, we have the constructs of that
part of this API object, so things like the arguments being passed in, or the entry
points, we see the commands that are executed. And going down a little bit
further, eventually we'll get the image, which is the container image that is used
to run this particular pod inside of our Kubernetes API. So very important
configuration elements are here because this maps back to what will feed into
the YAML manifest, kind of the architecture matches, right? These are the
configuration elements for a pod when we define them in YAML. So we'll revisit
this a little bit later when we start looking at pod manifests in the next section in
the course. Now, sometimes I just want to get a pretty dirty peek at
everything available to me for a particular API resource, and I can do that with
kubectl explain pod --recursive. And so that'll dump all of the configuration
elements or fields for a particular API resource for me to look at. And so if I page
to the output here, we see apiVersion, kind, and metadata, but we don't see the
description. It's just all of the fields kind of dumped out and so I can get a quick
look at what's available to me and a lot of different things as I page through this
about a particular resource that I want to discover maybe a configuration field
for. And I can go back and look at that in more detail using kubectl explain,
pointing at the particular configuration field for that object that I want to work
with.
Demo: Getting Resource Details with kubectl describe
So let's move forward and take a closer look at some of our nodes in much more
detail, and we can do that with kubectl describe. That's going to kind of show me
some deep dive configuration information and status information about a
resource. And we'll do this for nodes first. So, kubectl describe nodes c1-cp1. I'm
going to pipe that output to more and show you some of the configuration and
status information that's exposed via describe. And so in the output at the
bottom, we have name, c1-cp1. Role was control-plane, so this is a control plane
node that we're working with. We have a collection of labels, which are key-value
pairs that add some metadata to a resource to describe it. So here we could see
things like the CPU architecture, the operating system that's running, hostname,
and so on. We also have some annotations, which are used by other parts of
the cluster, perhaps to store some configuration data. So there we see things
associated with our pod network and our CRI or containerd Going down a little
bit further, we can see things like our creation timestamp. We can see things like
the current conditions of the node. And so it checks for things like
networking, memory pressure, and disk pressure, and it also tells us if our node is
up and running and ready, and we could see that also in the conditions where we
see ready status is true. Moving forward, we see some additional information
about things like networking. We have the IP address, the hostname, we have
some resource information in terms of available capacity, and also provisionable
or allocatable capacity to workloads. Going forward, we see some other
information around the system information, so in terms of the kernel version, the
operating system, our CPU architecture, and container runtime, and also our
kubelet version. So there we see 1.29.1. Other things that we see in here are the
pods that are running on this particular node and the resources associated with
those. And we'll go down a little bit further. We can see the remaining allocatable
resources of the remaining resources available for additional workload in our
nodes. And we'll look at this information in much more detail as we learn about
scheduling and workload placement, things like that. But this is some very deep
dive information describing the current status of a node. If you want to look at a
regular worker node, we can do that with kubectl describe nodes c1-code1. And
we see a lot of the same information, just that there's no system pods running on
this node, so there's a little bit less detail in terms of the workload that's running.
But things that we need to understand about this are that we know that the
conditions on this node are up and running already, so good stuff there. We see
some things like the networking configuration, its available capacity, its
allocatable capacity, and so on. So going down a little bit further, we could see a
much shorter list of the pods that are running on this node because it's not
running the control plane pods. It's just ready for user workload, running both
kube-proxy and our calico pod.
Demo: Finding Command Line Help and Configuring
Bash Auto-completion
Okay, so let's clear our screen and start out fresh and move forward and look at
our next demo where we're going to discover how to use the help at the
command line. So we focused a lot on the API and how to discover resources, but
also kubectl is just a command, and it's got command line help available to you at
the command line via the -h flag. And so if I do a kubectl -h, pipe that output into
more, we get a pretty good description of what we can do with the command line
grouped by different types of command. So basic commands. So create,
expose, run, these are all commands that we're going to use in our upcoming
demo. We could see things like explain and get and edit. We've used a couple of
these commands throughout this particular demo. And so just remember that
you do have access to the help at the command line when you're working with
kubectl. And if you want to dive into a particular help menu for a
command, well, you can do that with kubectl get -h because I wanted to find the
operation that I want to do. And in this output, I get additional information about
what we can do with kubectl get, but also some pretty good examples. So there
we see kubectl get pods, kubectl get pods -o wide, and other ways that we can
work with kubectl get, adding some output modifiers at the bottom here. So just
remember that this is available for you to discover what's going on inside of
kubectl. Let's look at one more with kubectl create -h, and we can see the
different ways to create a resource from both file or from standard in with
some examples of kubectl create there. Pretty cool stuff. So let's go ahead and
break out of this output and clear our screen and get into our final demo where
we're going to configure bash-autocomplete, so we can get real quick at the
command line when working with our cluster. And so to configure bash-
autocomplete, we install the bash completion package. I'm going to do that here
with the code line 72. That's going to install that package. And then we're going
to go ahead and configure that in our bashrc. And then we'll source our bashrc to
bring that configuration into scope. And so at the bottom here, I can type
kubectl. If I type g, double tab, it'll autocomplete the command for me because it
gave it enough information to expand that out to get. So now if I type po and I do
a double tab, it'll do pod. And then next I'll do a --all and then double tab, and
that'll give me the available commands that I can use for the output here. So I see
--all namespaces or --allow-missing-template-keys. Well, I'll need to add a little bit
more information about what I want, so I'll add an additional minus. Then I'll hit a
tab. And so there very quickly at the command line, I can complete this command
sequence with bash-autocomplete. And so now when I hit Enter, I'll see all of the
resources available to me and I was able to get that command line, construct it
much more quickly with bash-autocomplete. And so as you work more with your
cluster at the command line, you can use bash-autocomplete to build command-
line sequences very quickly across many different commands and many different
resource types.
Understanding Application Deployments in Kubernetes
So now that we know how to interact with our cluster at the command line, let's
move the conversation to application deployment in Kubernetes. Now, the first
thing we want to discuss here is imperative configuration. When you're using
imperative configuration, you're generally going to be executing commands at
the command line one at a time, and you're going to be operating on one object
at a time. And so, for example, if I want to create a deployment, I can use kubectl
create deployment nginx and specify the image as nginx. I punch this in at the
command line, I hit Enter, the command is sent to the API server, and the object is
created. But I'm only operating on one object at a time at the command line. Now,
similarly, I can create other types of objects. I can say kubectl run nginx, and it'll
create a bare pod that's not managed by a controller for me running nginx. Now,
that's a fine way to manage a system, but if your application stack starts to grow
and your configurations and your deployments become more complex, managing
each individual object at the command line isn't really a sustainable way
of managing or maintaining your system. We're going to want to do things
declaratively, and this is a core principle behind Kubernetes where we define our
desired state and code. Early in the series of courses, we introduced the concept
of manifests. First, we deployed our pod network, and second, when we
bootstrapped our cluster with static pod manifests. Those manifests described
those configurations in code, and Kubernetes was able to use them to bring the
system up to the desired state as described in those manifest files. And we can
do the same thing for our own applications. We can define our configurations in
code using manifests written in YAML or JSON and then feed those into the
API server with commands like kubectl apply. In this case here, you could see
kubectl apply -f deployment.yaml. And in the contents of deployment.yaml, we
will have the description of the things that I want to deploy inside of our
Kubernetes cluster.
Working with Manifests - Pods, Deployments, and Using
dry-run
So let's look inside our first basic YAML manifest together and we're going to look
at a pod manifest. We could have manifests for many different types of API
objects available in Kubernetes, but we're going to start this conversation with
pods. And the first thing that you're going to find in a manifest is the API
version. And in this case, it's going to be set to v1. As the Kubernetes API develops
to give users some stability as to how the API is defined and consumed, it's a
versioned. This way we know that a v1 pod will always look a particular way when
we call that in our code. And as API development progresses, perhaps a newer
version of the API becomes available, and that newer version has a different pod
definition, or honestly, whatever resource it is. Here in our manifests, we specify
the API version that we want, and this enables us to control which version of the
API we're consuming and thus adding some stability to the objects that we
consume in our deployments. The next thing that you're going to find in a
manifest is the kind. This is the kind of object that we want to define. In this case,
we're defining a pod. Remember when we did kubectl API resources in a previous
demo to list all of the resources available, those are the objects that we can use
here. We'll need some metadata to describe what we're working with here. And in
this case, we'll give our pod a name, and we're going to call it hello-app-pod. Next
up is the spec. Now, if you recall in the previous demonstration when we used
kubectl explain, I looked at pods, and we saw that the pod spec was in there, and
we saw that there was a required field. If you remember, we went into kubectl
explain, pod spec containers was required. And so here we define a
container. We're going to want to give our container a name. That's also required
as well. That name has to be unique in all of the containers in this pod, and we're
going to call this one hello-app. If we had multiple containers in here, we would
just give them unique names. And then, of course, there's the image backing the
container that we want to deploy. And so here we see a simple Hello World
application that I've built for this course and have stored in Azure container
registry. And for the container name here, we can see hello-app:1.0 for the image
tag. Now to deploy this, we save this information into a file, and then we can use
kubectl apply -f and say that we save it into a file named pod.yaml. When we
execute this command, it will feed this file into the API server, and the API server
will go make this happen for us and create this bare pod. Now, let's look at
another type of manifest, a deployment manifest. For a deployment, the
apiVersion is going to be apps/v1. The next thing that you're going to find in a
deployment manifest is the kind. In this case, we're defining a deployment. Under
metadata, we're going to describe what we're working with here, and in this
case, we're just going to give our deployment a name, and we're going to call it
hello-world. Next up in the spec, this is defining the implementation details of the
deployment object. And so first we'll define the number of replicas. This is the
number of pods that we want to start up and running for this deployment, and
we're going to start off with 1. The selector is a way for a deployment to know
which pods are a member of this deployment, and we'll be diving into labels and
selectors in much more detail in an upcoming course. And then there's the
template. This is the section that's used to define the pods created by this
deployment. You'll hear this called the pod template. And here we'll have a
metadata section as well, and we'll also define some labels. These are matched
with the selector that we just defined above in a deployment spec. These are
assigned to each pod that's created by this deployment. And then finally, there's
another spec this is the pod template spec. Here's where you define the
containers that are started by pods in this deployment. We'll define an image,
which here we're using our container, hello-app:1.0 from the application that I
built and pushed into an Azure container registry. And finally, we give our
container a name. In this case, it's going to be hello-app. Now to deploy this, we
save this information into a file named deployment.yaml, and we can use kubectl
apply -f and then specify that file name and that will feed this manifest into the
API server, and the API server will go make this habit for us, affecting the desired
state of the application in the cluster. In this case, it's going to be starting up one
replica of our hello-world application pod. Now, you might be thinking, how am I
going to remember all of this? Well, to build YAML manifests for deployments, or
really any objects that I want to work with, remember in that last demo when we
talked about kubectl explain, you can use kubectl explain to quickly look up the
fields for an object and help fill out the details for your manifests. Additionally,
you can use an output modifier called dry-run, which can generate basic
manifests like this very quickly. Let's look more closely at dry-run now. Now, we
can certainly write the YAML for a deployment manifest by hand, ensuring that
we get all the fields and all the spacing right. But what I want to show you now is
a way to generate the YAML needed to create a deployment or really any object
on the fly at the command line quickly and correctly. A few slides back, I showed
you how to create a deployment imperatively at the command line. With that
code and its parameters, we can combine that with --dry-run=client -o yaml. What
this will do is generate the YAML for the API object that you want to create, but
not send it into the API server for creation. What dry-run client -o yaml will do is
write the object in YAML to standard out. We can combine that with file IO
redirection and write the output into a file, and here you can see we're sending
the output into deployment.yaml. With this YAML manifest written in
deployment.yaml, we can use kubectl to send to deployment into our API server
for creation, or use this output as the starting template for more complex
deployment scenarios. I can't stress enough how helpful the dry-run parameter
can be to quickly generate correct YAML representation of objects, nearly any
object, not just deployments. And so I encourage you to use it frequently at the
command line to help you get proficient at generating correct manifests quickly
at the command line. Dry-run isn't just for deployments. You can use it for nearly
all resources, and we're going to use dry-run in our upcoming demos for creating
manifests for both deployments and also services.
Understanding the Kubernetes Application Deployment
Process
Now it's time to discuss what the API server is actually doing for us when creating
a deployment, and we're going to discuss the application deployment process in
Kubernetes. And at this point, we're going to bring together a lot of the theory
and the concepts that we've been going through throughout this series of
courses, and so it's that time that we're going to bring all of the elements
together. And so let's say we have a cluster and we're sitting down at the
command line with kubectl and we want to deploy an application into
Kubernetes and we say kubectl apply, and we pass in some sort of manifest
describing the objects that we want to create. And let's say that we want to
create a deployment. Well, that deployment is going to send a request into the
API server. The API server is going to parse that information and store
those objects persistently in etcd. The Controller Manager is watching for any
new objects that it needs to know about. Since we defined a deployment, that's
going to start up a controller for that deployment, which will create a replica set.
Then that replica set is going to create the required number of pods to support
that configuration and write that information about the pods back into etcd. The
scheduler is watching etcd to see if etcd has any pods that haven't yet been
assigned to nodes. And if it finds any unscheduled pods, it will schedule, or in
other words, assign a pod to run on a particular node in the cluster. Each pod
object is updated in etcd with the assigned node it needs to run on. Now, notice
no pods have actually started yet. What we have is the objects for the
deployment, the replica set, and the pods with their scheduled node information
all written in the etcd. And so how do pods actually start? Well, the kubelets on
the nodes are watching the API server asking do you have any work? Do you have
any work? And if it finds that there's a pod scheduled for that node, it's going to
send a message to the container runtime in that node to pull down the
appropriate container images specified in that pod spec and start up that pod on
the node. And if that pod is a member of a service, that services information will
be updated inside of kube-proxy on that node. This entire process is how
pods get deployed inside of Kubernetes. In this example, we described the
deployment. Similar processes exist for deploying other types of objects in
Kubernetes where the workflow will vary slightly. I just wanted to highlight this
example for you today to kind of connect the dots on all the various concepts
that we've been discussing throughout this series of courses.
Demo: Creating Workloads Imperatively
Let's get in our next demo. And in this demo, we're going to deploy some
resources using two different techniques. We're going to look at things
imperatively and declaratively. And using those techniques, we're going to learn
how to deploy resources in our cluster, focusing on deploying deployments, pods,
and services. Once we have this up and running, we'll look at how we can make
changes to existing resources in our cluster using both declarative and
imperative techniques. Let's get started. All right, so here we are logged into c1-
cp1, and let's get started with our demo of deploying some resources in our
cluster, and we're going to start off with creating a deployment together
imperatively. And so let's go ahead and do that with the code here on line 8. We
could say kubectl create deployment. We're going to give it a name, hello-world,
and we're going to use a container image for an application that I built named
hello-app with a tag of 1.0 that I pushed into an Azure container registry. And so
let's go ahead and run that code here on line 8 to create that deployment. And in
the output at the bottom there, we can see deployment.apps/hello-world
created. What's going to happen behind the scenes is that's going to create the
deployment, which is going to create the replica set, and that replica set is going
to create one pod of our application. Now, additionally, I want to create a bare
pod, or one that's not managed by a controller, just to show you how that works
as well. And we can do that here with the code on line 12, kubectl run hello-
world-pod and then specifying the container image for our hello-world
application. So let's go ahead and run that code here on line 12 to create that
bare pod. So let's look at some of the things that we have created now in
our cluster from a pod standpoint with kubectl get pods. Let's go ahead and run
that code. And you can see we have two pods up and running in our cluster, the
one that was created by the replica set, and also the bare pod. We could tell the
one that was created by the replica set by the naming convention. We see the
name of the deployment, hello-world, and then we see what's called the
pod template hash of 77bbb and so on. That's a hash of the pod template spec
and that becomes part of the actual creative pod's name. So this running pod is
part of the replica set, which is then part of our deployment. And the remainder
of the name, drmrh, is a unique identifier to uniquely identify this pod. Right
below that, we see our bare pod, hello-world-pod. Now let's go ahead and add
the output modifier -o wide to look at some additional information about these
two pots. So right here, we have the pod's IP addresses, 192.168.131.29 for the pod
that's managed by our deployment, 192.168.222.221 for the one that was created
by our bare pod. We could also see that those are scheduled onto two different
nodes, c1-node2 for the one that is created by our replica set, which was created
by our deployment, and then c1-node1 for the bare pod. Now remember,
Kubernetes is a container orchestrator, and it has the job of starting up
containers on nodes. And so we see that. We see two containers inside of pods
running on nodes in our cluster. Let's go ahead and SSH into one of those nodes
to see what's going on a little bit behind the scenes. So I'm going to grab this
code here and put it in a clipboard and paste it into the command line at the
bottom here. Let's go ahead and SSH into node2. So here at the bottom, you see
SSH, my username, log in into c1-node2. Now here on line 30, I have the code to
go ask the container runtime to list the running containers that are on this
individual node. So let's go ahead and run that code here on line 30 together,
sudo crictl, and then pointing at the runtime endpoint, which is that UNIX socket
right there. And if we run that code, we'll see that there are three different
containers running on this individual node. Our hello-world application is first,
and then we have two additional containers, one for our calico pod network and
also the kube-proxy. And so just to highlight there, really, all Kubernetes is doing
is starting containers on nodes inside of our cluster for us. So let's go ahead and
log out of our worker node, get back onto c1-cp1
Demo: Accessing Pods with kubectl logs and exec
Moving forward in the demo, I want to call out that we do have the ability to use
the command kubectl logs to read the logs from anything written to standard out
by the application running in a container inside of our pod. So this is super useful
when you're troubleshooting application issues. And so let's go ahead and run
the code here on line 39, kubectl logs, and then the pod name, hello-world-pod.
Run that code there, and you can see that the application I wrote when it starts
up tells us two things. The port that it's listening on, here we see server listening
on port 8080, and then server requests off of a base URL in our application. Now,
additionally, we can go ahead and we can launch a process inside of a
container. And here the process that we're going to launch is actually a shell, and
I'm going to show you how to attach to a shell so you can execute commands
interactively inside of a container inside of a pod running anywhere in your
cluster. And you can do that with kubectl exec -it for interactive terminal. We're
going to specify the pod name, so hello-world-pod, and then we have a --, and
then we name the process or the executable that we want to launch inside the
container here at /bin/sh. And since we use the -it flags here, that gives us an
interactive shell in that container inside of that pod. And so now we can run
commands as if we're on that terminal for that particular container. And we can
do hostname to see what the hostname of the system that we're running on is,
and we could see that actually is the pod's name. We could type in ip addr, the
list, the address of the networking stack inside of the pod. And here at the bottom
there, we can see for the eth0 interface, it's a 192.168.222.221, or the pod IP that
we looked at a few minutes ago in our kubectl get pods -o wide output. So let's
go ahead and exit out of that container, get back on to c1-cp1 again. So using
those commands is quite useful for troubleshooting both kubectl logs and
kubectl exec when you need to do some things to get information out of your
container or to execute commands inside of the containers running inside of
pods.
Demo: A Deeper Dive into Deployments, Replica Sets,
and Pods
And so now let's look a little more closely at the deployment that we
launched, and we can do that with kubectl get deployment hello-world. So when
I launched that code right there, what that's gonna do is give me the basic
information about a deployment. And let's let's walk through that output at the
bottom here. So we can see the name of the deployment, hello-world, and we see
READY 1/1. That means there's one pod that's up, running, and ready supporting
our deployment. We see that it's up to date, meaning it's running the newest
version of the application deployment that we used. And we haven't talked about
rolling updates or anything like that yet. We'll talk about that in an upgrading
course. But for right now, just know that it's running the latest version of our
application. And we also see that one is available and it's been up for about 6
minutes and 23 seconds when we rolled out that application at the start of this
demo. Now, a deployment has the responsibility of creating a replica set, so let's
look at that. Let's go ahead and launch kubectl get replicaset to look at the
replica sets right in our cluster. And there in the output at the bottom, we can see
the replica set supporting our deployment named hello-world -77bbb for the pod
template hash, and so that uniquely identifies that replica set. We see that
DESIRED, CURRENT, and READY are all 1s, meaning our 1 pod is up and running,
it's on the current version of the application, and it's been up for about 7
minutes. And again, we'll look in much more detail about how deployment rollouts
and replica set rollouts look in an upcoming course. With kubectl get pods, we
can see now the pattern for determining a pod be part of a particular
deployment. So let's look at the output at the bottom here. We see hello-world,
the deployment name, we see the pod template hash, so 77bbb and so on, and a
unique identifier for the pod with the pod's name ending in drmrh. So that's how
we can see how that all stitches together from a naming convention standpoint,
but let's look even closer at how that all comes together. Let's use kubectl
describe to get that deep dive information about a resource. In this case, we're
going to look at our deployment that we just rolled out. And so on line 62, I have
kubectl describe deployment hello-world. We're going to pipe that output into
more. Now on the output at the bottom here, we have tons of information about
the deployment. We have the name hello-world. We can see that it was deployed
into the default namespace. If we go down a little bit further, we can see the pod
template that was used to create the pods in the replica set, and then
subsequently the replica set creating those pods for us. And this was part of the
pod template spec that is executed when we typed kubectl create
deployment. And so there is the pod template and then our containers hello-
app running the image of our hello-app 1.0 application. Going down a little bit
further in the output here, I'm going to point out the events. The events show
some really good information about the status of what's going on in a particular
deployment. So here we see ScalingReplicaSet event from the deployment
controller, which is the controller that had the responsibility of creating the
replica set for us. And so there we see them in the message, scaled up replica
set hello-world 77bbb and so on to 1. Right, so the deployment here created the
replica set for us. Now let's look in more detail at the replica set. We can do that
with the code here on line 67, kubectl describe replicaset hello-world. I'm going
to pipe that into more as well. So in here we have the deep dive
information describing our hello-world replica set. We can see the name, hello-
world, with the pod template hash 77bbb and so on. Going down a little bit
further here, we see the pod template for the replica set, same as before because
it's the application that we've rolled out. Our container is going to be hello-
app. Our image is going to be our hello-app 1.0 application. Now, the replica set
had the responsibility of creating the pods. We can see that in the events. We see
SuccessfulCreate from the replicaset-controller, and it created our pod for us. And
so that pod name looks pretty familiar by now. Hello-world, the pod template
hash, followed by the unique identifier, drmrh. That's that unique pod running our
application. And so that's how you can see how that all pieces together. The
deployment controller creates the replicaset-controller, and the replicaset-
controller creates the pods. Now let's dig a little bit deeper into that pods
configuration, and we're going to do that with this kubectl command here on line
73. So I'm going to grab this and put it in my clipboard because we can use bash-
autocomplete to show you how that works to complete the pod name for us. So
I'm going to copy kubectl describe pod hello-world, and that minus at the end
there. Put that in my clipboard, paste it at the bottom here, and when I double
tab now, you can see it's going to try to autocomplete, giving me the two unique
pods that are running in our cluster, the one that's controlled by our deployment
and also that bare pod. Let's give our autocomplete a little bit more information
about the pod that we want. I'll add a 7 here and then I'll hit tab, and you can see
it autocompletes. Go ahead and hit Enter to execute that command. And so let's
scroll up and look at the output of kubectl describe pod. So first off, we see the
pod's name, hello-world 77bbb and so on with the unique identifier of
drmrh. Looking at some other information, we could see for the node, it's
scheduled on c1-node2. Going down a little bit further in the output, we can see
that the status is running and its IP address is 192.168.131.29 for this particular pod
that's part of our deployment. We also see Controlled By: ReplicaSet, and then
the hello-world replica set that is responsible for this particular pod, the one with
the pod template hash beginning with 77bbb and so on. We also see our
containers, our hello-app container, and then the container image is our hello-
app: 1.0 image. We can see the state is running, and it was started just a
few minutes ago when the replica set created this particular pod. And so I'm
going to jump down to the bottom now to look at some of the events associated
with this pod. And again, some really good information is available to us here. And
let's walk through this together. The first event that we see, we see successfully
assigned, and then our pod name to c1-node2. That's that scheduling event that
occurred. Now, remember, the scheduling event just updates the pod's metadata
in etcd via the API. It just says, you know what, run this pod on this node. It's then
the responsibility of the kubelet to pull for that information or to watch for that
information, and so that's why we see the next event is the container image being
pulled out. In this particular example here, the container image was already
present on this machine. It knew that, and it doesn't have to re-pull that image
down. Once that image is on that node, create and then start the container
and our application is now up and running. So, some pretty good information
about the scheduling events will be in this part of a pod. So if you're in a
troubleshooting situation, fantastic place to look right there. Now, we're just
scratching the surface here introducing deployments. If you want to deep dive
into how deployments work, check out my other course, Managing Kubernetes
Controllers and Deployments, and we will go into all facets of managing
deployments and rollouts in Kubernetes.
Demo: Imperatively Exposing Applications with Services
So let's go ahead and move forward. We have our deployment up and
running. We're running a pod. I want to make that accessible to our users. And
that's what we're going to do here on line 87. We're gonna expose our
deployment as a service on a port so users can access our application. And so
let's walk through the code here on line 87 together, kubectl expose, what are we
going to expose. The resource is going to be a deployment, and a specific
deployment, hello-world. We're going to send user traffic to port 80, and we
define that with the parameter --port=80. Our application inside the container is
listed on port 80, and we saw that when we looked at the kubectl logs output. And
so on line 89, we specify --target-port=8080. And so user traffic will come in on
port 80 and be routed to port 8080 in the application running inside of
our containers inside of our deployments. And so let's go ahead and run that
code there to expose our service, and in the output at the bottom, you can see
service/hello-world exposed. So now that our service is available, we can use
kubectl get service hello-world to find out what IP to send user traffic to and the
output at the bottom. Let's walk through that together. We have our service name
is hello-world. It's a type cluster IP. The cluster IP address is 10.111.7.20. So that's
where we'll send user traffic inside the cluster. There's no external IP because this
is available just inside of our cluster because it is a cluster IP service and
it's listening on port 80 on TCP. Now, kubectl describe can give us some pretty
good information about some deeper dive configuration elements of our
service. And so let's go ahead and run that here. So kubectl describe service
hello-world, and then we can see a lot more information about our deployment.
We see the name, hello-world, the namespace associated with that. We can see
the type is cluster IP and the IP address is 10.111.7.20. The port is 80/tcp, and then
a target port, which is what the actual application is listing on, is port 8080. Now,
the endpoints are the pods that the traffic will actually be routed to. So right now
we just have one pod up and running, and so we see just one IP address there of
the pod IP for the pod supporting our deployment, 192.168.131.29 listening on
8080. And so as user traffic comes in on the service address, 10.111.7.20, it's going
to route it to the actual pod on that pod endpoint. And so let's do just that. Let's
grab this particular IP address and throw it into our clipboard. And at the bottom
here, I'm gonna type curl http://, paste in the services IP address on port 80. I
want to execute curl. We can see that we hit our application. It says Hello, world!,
version 1.0, and the application outputs the actual pod name. So there you see
hello-world, the pod template hash, and then a unique identifier for this particular
pod, the one that is running right now supporting our deployment, drmrh. All
right. So let's move forward and look at something a little more closely from a
service standpoint. We can actually, when we're inside the cluster, hit the
endpoint address directly. And so this can be very useful for troubleshooting a
single application on a single pod if I want to access it directly, not through a
service. And so if I do a kubectl get endpoints for our hello-world service, that's
going to output all of the end points that are running in the cluster. In this case,
it's still just one. And so then I can use curl to access that application So I'm going
to grab our endpoint, put that in our clipboard, and I'll do a curl http://, paste that
in there. And now I'm hitting that individual pod directly, not via the service, so it's
not going to get routed or load balanced or anything. And so if I need to hit an
exact pod's traffic, I can use this technique to do that. If I need to troubleshoot or
look more closely at the individual pod's application. So, very useful technique
there for troubleshooting.
Demo: Accessing Resources with Output Modifiers
Now we have a bunch of code up and running, which we deployed in our
cluster all imperatively, and we can get some YAML representations of what's
running on our cluster if we want by using output modifiers. And so that's what
we're doing here on lines 114 and 115. I'm going to do a kubectl get deployment
hello-world, and then I'm going to use the output modifier -o yaml. I want to pipe
that output to more. And now at the bottom here instead of just getting kind
of that table representation of the deployment, I get the YAML representation of
the deployment, and all the deep dive information that describes this particular
API resource deployed in our cluster. And so we see things like apiVersion: apps/
v1, the kind is deployment, the metadata, the spec, associated with this particular
deployment, and so much more. Breaking out of this output here, we could also
do the same in JSON if we need to get output of our cluster in JSON format. So
I'm going to do a kubectl get deployment hello-world -o json, pipe that output to
more, and we can see that we have a JSON representation of our object now. This
can be useful for monitoring our configuration management if you want to look at
what's running in our cluster and pulling that information out in kind of more
machine consumable formats like JSON or YAML. So let's go ahead and break out
of this code here, and what we're going to do now is we're gonna delete
everything that we just created imperatively, and we're going to start over doing
the same tasks, but using a declarative model. I'm gonna show you how to
create all the resources that we just created in code. And so let's go ahead and
clean some things up. First up, let's see what we have running in our cluster, and
we have our deployment, which created the replica set, which created a pod. We
have our bare pod up and running, and we also have the service supporting our
application. And so let's go ahead and delete all of those things. I'm going to
delete the service with kubectl delete service hello-world, and I'm going to delete
the deployment with kubectl delete deployment hello-world, which will delete
the deployment, which will delete the replica set, which will also terminate and
delete the pod. I have to delete the bare pod by hand because that's not
managed by a controller. And so let's go ahead and highlight these three lines of
code and run them together in the output at the bottom here. We can see those
resources all being deleted. And now if I do a kubectl get all again, all I should
have left is our Kubernetes service supporting our API inside the cluster, and
there it is.
Demo: Generating Manifests with dry-run and Deploying
Resources Declaratively
So now it's time to deploy some resources declarative in a cluster, and I want to
show you first how to use dry-run client to build a YAML manifest from a template
very quickly. And we can use the declarative code to do that. And so that's what
we're doing here on line 134. Line 134, I'm seeing kubectl create deployment
hello-world for our hello-world application running on our container image, hello-
app:1.0. And then I want to add the output modifier, dry-run=client -o yaml. I want
to pipe that into more. Running this code here, we can see in the output at the
bottom we now have, well, a well-formed YAML manifest describing what we want
to do. We want to create a deployment, hello- world, and there we see all of the
code supporting just that at the bottom here. And so everything from the API
version all the way down to the number of replicas, and if we move to the bottom
of the output, even the actual pod template spec defined in our container image.
And we didn't have to do any layout or mess around with spaces. It's just a well-
formed template for us to work with. And so let's take that and write that at the
file, and that's what we're doing here on line 140. We're in the same code, kubectl
create deployment. Dry-run=client. But I'm going to redirect that IO into a file
named deployment.yaml. Let's go ahead and run that code together, and if we
look inside of that file with the more command, we see more deployment.yaml. We
have our well-formed deployment manifest for a simple deployment. It's going to
break out of that code there, and then we can do a kubectl apply -f to push that
manifest into the API server, which creates the deployment, which creates the
replica set, which creates that single pod for us since we asked for just one
replica. Now let's do the same thing, but for service. I can say kubectl expose
deployment hello-world again declaratively, specifying the port and target port,
port 80 for our service and port 8080 for the container-based applications
port. Combine that with dry-run=client -o yaml, pipe that into more, and now we
have the YAML manifest describing the service that we want to create. Now we
use the same technique of file IO redirection to send that code into a file named
service.yaml. Look inside of there before we move forward to make sure
everything is okay, and it is, with more space service.yaml, and the output at
the bottom shows us the contents of that file. So let's go ahead and push that
into the API server with kubectl apply -f service.yaml. In the output at the bottom
there, we could see our hello-world service was created. So let's see what we
have now, right? We'll do a kubectl get all to kind of check the current state of our
cluster. Well, we created a deployment, and there it is in the output at the
bottom, deployment.apps/hello-world. It's 1/1 is ready because they have a
single replica in that deployment. That deployment created a replica set, which
then created a pod, and so there we see the pod at the top, pod/hello-
world-77bbb and so on, different unique identifier because the new pod, s2449, is
that new pod. We also have our service up and running, and there these service/
hello-world, type is ClusterIP. We've got a new service IP address 10.99.12.154.
Demo: Modifying Existing Resources in Your Cluster -
Part 1
And so that's how quickly we can generate code and deploy code in our
cluster. And so now let's do some operations on these deployments from a scaling
standpoint. I'm going to show you how to affect changes to existing resources in
your cluster. And so let's go ahead and start that process. The first thing I want to
do is on a scale are replicas from 1 replica to 20 replicas. Let's go ahead and do
that by opening up our deployment manifest, deployment.yaml, and then going
down here, I'm going to change the replicas in the pod template spec from 1 to
20. And now I'm going to save that file out. Nothing changed yet. It's just
changed in the file because I have to take that file and send it back into the API
server to effect that change. And that's what we're doing here on line 184. I'm
going to do kubectl apply -f, sending in that same file, but with the replicas
changed from 1 to 20. What's going to happen is it's going to change the state of
the cluster. And so there in the output at the bottom, you see deployment.apps/
hello-world configured. We changed the state of the cluster, and it's going to
move the running state of the cluster into the desired state. And if we check now
and I do kubectl get deployment hello-world, run that code, I now have 20 pods
up and running in our cluster, and there we see 20/20 is up running and
ready. And if I do kubectl get pods now and I type that into more, we see a lot
more pods up and running. If you look at the structure of the name, you can see
the pattern now. Hello-world for the deployment, the pod template hash 77bbb
and so on. And then at the end there, a unique identifier for each pod
that's running in this particular deployment that's managed by this replica set for
the 20 pods that are created. Let's go ahead and break out of that output there,
and let's look at how load balancing works inside of our cluster. If I do kubectl get
service hello-world, you'll see that our service, hello-world, is running on the
cluster IP 10.99.12.154. And so we'll send end user traffic to that particular cluster
IP address on port 80.
Demo: Modifying Existing Resources in Your Cluster -
Part 2
And then the service has the responsibility of load balancing that traffic across all
of the pods that support that service. And so let's go ahead and grab that cluster
IP and put that into our clipboard. ANd at the bottom here, I'll type curl http://,
pasting in our service IP address on port 80. And if I hit Enter now, we'll see I hit a
pod whose unique identifier ends in dhn2s. Do it again, cft98. So now you can see
how I'm load balancing across the many different pods supporting this particular
deployment in our cluster. And so that's the responsibility of the service is to
send that traffic to the various pods in our cluster. And so there we see it load
balancing across all of those. Now, we changed our state of our cluster by
changing the code and redeploying the code. But sometimes you might have to
get in there and make a quick on-the-fly change that's not reflected in a YAML
manifest. Just maybe this is a kind of an emergency operation or just something
that you need to change quickly. And we could edit an object that's running
in the cluster with the code kubectl edit deployment, and here we're going to do
our hello-world deployment. So if I highlight this code and I run it, what it's going
to do is it's going to open that API object and it's going to retrieve the YAML
representation of that resource and present it to me in my default editor. And for
me that's VIM. If you're on Windows, this would be on Notepad or whatever your
default system editor is. And so in the YAML manifest here at the bottom, it's all of
various metadata for an object. So it's a little bit deeper dive than the things that
we've looked at so far. But I want to go down to the bottom here, and you can
look for the replica section in the deployment spec. And so in our initial
deployment, we set it to 1, and we change the state to 20. Now I'm going to
change the state from 20 to 30. Now we're editing the API resource directly. And
so when I save this out here, what it's going to do, it's going to send that change
back into the API server immediately and affect that change. And so there we see
at the bottom deployment.apps, hello-world is edited. So that actually changed
the state of that resource. And so if we go and do a kubectl get deployment now
for hello-world, we'll see that there are 30 pods up and running. So it's just a
different technique for managing the state of your cluster. If you need to make a
quick change, you can do that with kubectl edit. Another way that we can affect
the change to a deployment is using the scale command, kubectl scale
deployment hello-world --replicas=40. Again, this will change the state of the
cluster from 30 to 40 replicas, but it's not representing code. So this is the
change against that object in the cluster that's up and running right now, so we
won't have that representation in the YAML manifest. It's just a runtime
change. And if I do a kubectl get deployment hello-world now, we can see that
we have 40 pods up and running in our cluster. And so now we are all done with
this particular demo. And let's go ahead and clean things up. I'm going to do a
kubectl delete deployment, which will delete the deployment, which will delete
the replica set, and we'll delete all the pods that are controlled by that replica
set. We'll also delete the service here with kubectl delete service. It's going to
clean things up. And now if I do a kubectl get all, the only thing that should be
running is the Kubernetes service, and that's that.
Module Summary, What's Next, and Thank You!
Here we are at the end of our course. So we introduced how we can interact with
a cluster focusing on using kubectl to retrieve different types of information out
of our cluster. And then we look closely at how we can deploy some
applications and what's really happening behind the scenes. We discussed both
imperative and declarative deployment methods. And hopefully, I made the case
for using declarative deployment methods in your Kubernetes clusters. So here
we are at the end of our course, and I really hope you enjoyed listening to this
and that we laid the appropriate foundations for your Kubernetes studies. We
looked closely at how to interact with our cluster using kubectl, and we did some
application deployments together. It's truly been a pleasure recording this
course, and I thank you for listening, and most importantly, learning with me. I
hope you enjoyed the course and join me again soon here at Pluralsight.