Storage for CKA
Persistent Volumes and Claims
Introduction to Kubernetes Storage
Hello, and welcome to the course Storage for CKA. My name is Antonio Piedra,
and I'll be your guide throughout this course. Storage is one of the key domains in
the CKA exam, accounting for a full 10% of the test, so it's critical to get it right. In
this course, we are going to start covering what are Persistent Volumes and
Claims, why they are crucial for stateful applications in Kubernetes. Next, we will
talk about access modes, for example, read-only or read-write, and also we'll dive
into reclaim policies for deciding what to do with the data after the Persistent
Volume is deleted. After that, we will cover what the storage classes are and how
they can be used for dynamic storage provisioning. And finally, I will share some
tips to help you nail this part of the CKA exam. Let's get started. Why is storage
such an important topic in Kubernetes? It comes down to the nature of
containers themselves. By design, containers are ephemeral. This means that
when a pod is deleted, crashes, or gets rescheduled to a different node, any data
that was saved inside the container's writeable layer is lost forever. This is
perfectly fine for stateless applications. Think of our server frontend. If a pod
running NGINX crashes, Kubernetes can spin up a new identical
replacement. Since it doesn't store any unique data, the application continues to
run without any data loss. But what about for stateful applications? Consider a
database. A database is useless if it loses all the data every time a pod is
restarted. It must maintain its states, the data, across restarts, failures and
updates. This is where Kubernetes storage comes in. The entire purpose of the
Kubernetes storage system is to provide a stable and persistent place for your
stateful workflows completely independent of the pod's lifecycle. To solve this
challenge, Kubernetes offers a powerful and flexible set of studies resources. We
are going to dive into each of these in the upcoming modules, but let me give
you a brief overview of the key players now. At the most basic layer, we have
volumes. A Kubernetes volume is simply a directory that is made accessible to
the containers within a pod. The crucial part is that its lifecycle is tied to the
pod. So if the pod is deleted, the volume is also destroyed. This is great for
sharing data between containers in the same pod, but it doesn't solve our data
persistence problem. For that, we need to decouple the storage lifecycle from the
pod lifecycle. Kubernetes does this with two main objects, Persistent Volumes,
PVs. A Persistent Volume is a piece of storage in the cluster. Think of it as a
resource in the cluster, just like a node or a CPU. It's provisioned by a cluster
administrator or also by a storage class and has a lifecycle that is completely
independent of any pod. PVs are implemented using plugins for various storage
backends, like NFS, iSCSi, or cloud provider storage, like Google Persistent Disk or
AWS Elastic Block Storage. We also have Persistent Volume Claims, PVCs. A
Persistent Volume Claim is a request for a storage by a user or an application. A
developer can say I need 5 GB of storage that can be written to without needing
to know any details about the underlying storage infrastructure. Kubernetes then
matches this claim to a suitable Persistent Volume. Finally, to automate all of
these, we have StorageClasses. A StorageClass allows administrator to define the
different classes of storage that they offer within the cluster. A class could define
performance tiers, like a slow HDD or fast SSD or backup policies. When a PVC
requests a certain class, Kubernetes can dynamically provision a brand-
new Persistent Volume for just that claim. But how does the binding between the
PVC and PV happen? A Persistent Volume Claim, or PVC, is a request for a
storage made by a user. When you are deploying an application, you create a
PVC manifest that says I need 10 GB of storage and I need to be able to write into
it. You don't need to know anything about the underlying storage
infrastructure. The Kubernetes control plane then acts as a matchmaker. It looks
at your PVC request and finds any available PV in the cluster that meets those
requirements. Once it finds a match, it simply binds the PV to the PVC, and this is
a 1-to-1 mapping. Due to this process, a Persistent Volume can be in one of few
phases. Available; it's free and is not yet bound to any claim. Bound; it has been
successfully matched and is in use by a PVC. Released; the PVC using it has been
deleted, but the volume is not yet available for a new claim. And also the last
phase is failed, which means that the volume has encountered an error.
Demo: Spin up a Minikube Cluster
For all the demos within this course, I have created a series of files that you can
find in the Exercises files tab. You can use them to run these steps in your
environment, which will also help you prepare for the exam. In this specific
demo, we will create the Kubernetes cluster that we will use throughout the
course. There are a couple of things that we need to do before getting
started. The first one is download and install Docker, and the other one is install
Minikube. Minikube is a very lightweight Kubernetes cluster that you can execute
in almost every computer. Once both Docker and Minikube are installed, we will
start the Kubernetes cluster. For that, we will execute the minikube start
command. Node that I'm specifying the driver and also the number of nodes. In
this case, 3. The process of starting minikube may take a while because it needs
to download some images. Once the start tab is complete, we will run the kubectl
cluster-info to verify that the cluster is up and running. We can see that the
Kubernetes control plane is running and also we can see that CoreDNS is running
on the cluster. Throughout this course, we will be using a series of namespaces
for each of the demos. So the next thing that we are going to do is create the
namespaces. We are going to have 3 namespaces for modules 1, 2, and 3, and
then we will have 2 namespaces for mock-exam1 and mock-exam2. Those are two
example questions that we will do at the end of the course. Once the namespace
has been created, we will execute the kubectl get namespaces to verify their
creation. And we can see that the five namespaces have been successfully
created. Whenever you see the sum, you will realize that for each of the tasks
they are providing a command to switch the Kubernetes context. Make sure that
as soon as you start working on the task, you execute that command. Otherwise,
you may end up deleting resources or creating resources in other
namespaces. With this set of commands, we will be creating the Kubernetes
context that we are going to be using throughout the course. Once we have
successfully created the context, we are going to run the kubectl config get-
contexts to list down the context. And we can see that the contexts have been
also successfully created. In the exam, you will be provided a command like the
one that we are going to execute now, kubectl config use-context, and the name
of the context. In this case, module1-context. We will run it. And then if we run the
kubectl config current-context, we will see that the current-context has changed
to module1-context. Another thing that we are going to be using in this course is
using storage classes. One of the storage classes actually needs
a ClusterRoleBinding to be able to create resources. So we are going to grant the
necessary permissions to the storage-provisioner service account. And that
should be all for the cluster setup. Whenever you are done working with your
cluster locally, you will need to run minikube stop to stop the cluster, and then
minikube delete --purge to remove the cluster completely from your environment.
Demo: Create a PV and PVC
Now that the cluster is up and running, let's look at a basic example of Persistent
Volumes and Persistent Volume Claims. The first thing that we are going to do is
switch to the module 1 context. Get familiar with this step because you will need
to do this in each of the exercises in the exam. Let's now review the Persistent
Volume definition that I have prepared. This YAML file defines a Persistent
Volume resource called my-pv. The capacity of the Persistent Volume is 2 GB. The
accessModes is ReadWriteOnce, and the hostPath is data /my-pv. We will look at
the different type of accessModes later on, but for now, let's focus on the
hostPath. This points to a directory in the Kubernetes node. Now we will execute
the kubectl apply command to create the Persistent Volume. And after that, we
will execute the kubectl get pv command to ensure that the Persistent Volume
has been successfully created. We can see that the status is set to available and
the claim is still empty. Now, let's create a Persistent Volume Claim. I have already
prepared one called my-pvc where we are requesting 2 GB of storage. We are not
setting any storageClassName because we want to disable dynamic
provisioning. We will look at what dynamic provisioning is and how to enable it
later on in the course. Now, let's run the kubectl apply command to create the
PVC. And after that, we will execute the kubectl get pvc command, and we
can see that the status is set to Bound. Now, we will make sure that the PVC has
been bound to the correct Persistent Volume. For that, we will run kubectl get pv,
and we can see that the PV status is now also Bound and that the claim is set to
module1, which is the namespace, /my-pvc, which is the name of the Persistent
Volume Claim.
Demo: Deploy a Stateful Application
We are now going to create a pod that makes use of our Persistent Volume
Claim. Let's start by reviewing the pod definition. Here we are defining a pod
called storage-test-pod, which uses the nginx image. The pod is using the my-
pvc storage claim and is setting /usr/share/nginx/html as the mountPath. Let's
now create the pod with the kubectl apply command. Now let's wait for the pod
to be ready. Now that the pod is running, I will press Ctrl+C, and now we are
going to execute the kubectl exec command to include 'Hello from system
storage!' within the index.html page of our nginx web server. After that, we will
verify that the file was created by using the cat command. As we can see, it's
printing 'Hello from persistent storage!' Now let's simulate a failure of a pod by
deleting it. We will use the kubectl delete pod command. Deleting the pod should
not have deleted the Persistent Volume Claim or Persistent Volume, so let's make
sure that they are still there. As we can see, they are both still there and they are
bound one to each other. Now let's recreate the pod with the kubectl apply
command. Let's try to cat the file again, and we can see that the file is still
there. So, we have essentially created a stateful application. No matter how many
times the po is restarted, the information will be preserved.
Access Modes and Reclaim Policies
Volume Types and Access Modes
We got our hands dirty, creating Persistent Volumes and Persistent Volume
Claims and proof that they allow our data to survive when a pod is deleted, but
this raises two important questions. How do we control how multiple pods can
access the same volume, and what happens to the data on the volume when we
delete the claim? In this module, access modes and reclaim policies will answer
both these questions. Let's briefly touch on volume types. Kubernetes supports
many different kinds of volumes from single or node storage, like hostPath, to
network file systems, like NFS, or cloud provider-specific storage,
like awsElasticBlockStorage, or gcePersistentDisk. The most important thing to
know is that the underlying storage technology dictates which access modes are
supported. A block storage volume from cloud provider can often only be
attached to a single node at a time, which limits its access options. This brings us
to volume access mode. Access modes define the read-write permission
and sharing capabilities of a volume. There are three main modes you must know
for the CKA exam. ReadWriteOnce, the most common and widely supported
mode. It means the volume can be mounted as read-write by a single node. Be
careful with the wording here. It doesn't mean a single pod. You can have
multiple pods on the very same node using a ReadWriteOnce volume at the same
time. The next mode is ReadOnlyMany. This mode allows the volume to be
mounted as a read-only by many nodes at the same time. This is perfect for
sharing data that doesn't change often, like configuration files or a static website
access across your entire cluster. The last mode is ReadWriteMany. This mode
allows the volume to be mounted as read-write by many nodes
simultaneously. This is the most flexible and powerful mode, but it requires a
storage backend that can support it, like NFS or other distributed file systems.
Demo: Volume Access Modes
In this demo, we are going to see how using a ReadWriteOnce access mode in our
Persistent Volume prevents us from using the volume across multiple nodes
within the cluster. Let's start by switching the context to module2. Then we will
review the Persistent Volume Claim definition. And here we are defining a
Persistent Volume Claim called rwo-pvc. In this case, we are using the csi-
hostpath storage class to automatically create the Persistent Volume for us. We
will check how dynamic provisioning works later on in the course. We are also
defining the access mode, in this case, ReadWriteOnce, and also requesting 1 GB
of _____. Let's now create the PVC resource with the kubectl apply command. After
running this, the Persistent Volume should also be created. So let's verify that. We
can see that the Persistent Volume Claim has been created and also
the Persistent Volume, and the status of both of them is set to Bound. Now let's
see in what node the Persistent Volume was actually created. The Persistent
Volume was created in the second node. So now we will create a pod that runs on
that very same node and uses the Persistent Volume Claim. Let's review the
definition. In line number 7, we are using the node name where the pod will
run. We are also defining the Persistent Volume Claim. We'll create the pod using
the kubectl apply command. After creating the pod, we will run kubectl get pod
to verify that the pod is up and running, and we can see that the status is
reported as running. Now we will try to create a second pod called pod-b that
runs on a different node. In this case, it's going to run on node number 3 and also
will try to mount the same Persistent Volume Claim. Let's try to create the pod. We
can see that the pod was successfully created and we verify the status with the
kubectl get pod command. We can see that the pod is stuck in
ContainerCreating a state. Let's investigate why that's happening using the
kubectl describe command. In the event we can see the FailedMount, so the
node was unable to mount the PVC. If the volume was ReadWriteMany, both
pods will start successfully, even on different nodes. Let's now perform some
cleanup. We will start by deleting the pods. And finally, we will delete the
Persistent volume claim which will also end up deleting the Persistent Volume.
Volume Reclaim Policies
Now, let's tackle our second question. What happens to the data when the PVC is
deleted? This is controlled by the volume reclaim policy. This policy tells
Kbbernetes what to do with the Persistent Volume after its claim is
released. There are three policies. Retain, which is the default and safest
policy. When the PVC is deleted, the PV is not deleted. It enters a released
state. The data on the underlying storage volume remains untouched. A cluster
administrator must then manually inspect the volume, back up the data if
needed, and then clean up the volume and storage. The second policy is
delete. When a PVC is deleted, the Persistent Volume object is also deleted.
Kubernetes instruct the storage backend to delete the underlying storage asset
as well. This means that your AWS or GCE disk will be gone forever. This is very
useful for temporarily or scratch data where you want automatic cleanup to
happen. And the last policy is recycle. This policy is deprecated. It used to
perform a basic rm -rf on the volume's contents to clean it up for reuse. You
should not use it, but it's good to know that it once existed. Modern dynamic
provisioning with storage classes has replaced this functionality.
Demo: Volume Reclaim Policies
In this demo, we're going to check how the reclaim policies affect the Persistent
Volumes when the their claims are deleted. First, we are going to create two
Persistent Volumes, one called pv-retain and the other one called pv-delete. The
definition of the two persistent volumes is pretty much the same. The only
differences are line number 5, where we are defining the name, and also line
number 11, where we are defining the Persistent Volume Reclaim policy. In one of
them is delete, in the other one we are setting retain. Let's now create the two
Persistent Volumes using the kubectl apply command. Now, we will also create
Persistent Volume Claims. Similarly to the Persistent Volume, our Persistent
Volume Claim definitions will be pretty much the same as well. The only
difference will be the name. Now, we are also going to execute the kubectl apply
command to create both of the Persistent Volume Claims. Then we will verify that
both the Persistent Volume Claims and the Persistent Volumes are created and
bound. As we can see, the status for both the Persistent Volume Claim and
also the Persistent Volumes is set to Bound. Now we are going to delete both of
the PVC using the kubectl delete pvc command. After that, we will check the
status of the PV with the kubectl get pv command, and you will notice that we
only have a single Persistent Volume. The pv-delete Persistent Volume has been
deleted after we removed the Persistent Volume Claim. And this is due to the
delete reclaimed policy. We still have the pv-retain Persistent Volume, and that's
because we set retain as the reclaim policy. The data remains on the node, and if
we want to reuse it again, then it will require intervention. We will also notice that
the status has changed from Bound to Released. Based on your application
requirements, in some cases you may choose delete for your Persistent
Volume Claim when the data isn't really needed, or you may use the retain
reclaim policy for applications like a database for which you need to keep the
data. Let's now perform some cleanup of the Persistent Volume that is still there.
Storage Classes and Dynamic Provisioning
Storage Classes in Kubernetes
We'll learn how to manually create and manage Persistent Volumes. While this is a
fundamental skill, you can probably see that it doesn't scale. Imagine being a
cluster administrator and having to manually create a Persistent Volume every
time a developer needs a piece of storage. It would be slow, tedious, and prone to
error. This is the problem that our next topic solves. In this module, Storage
Classes and Dynamic Provisioning, we learn how to automate the entire process
of creating Persistent Volumes. So, what is a StorageClass? A StorageClass is a
cluster-level resource that allows an administrator to define different classes or
tiers of storage that they offer. You can think of it as a template or a factory for
creating Persistent Volumes. For example, you could create a fast SSD class that
provisions high performance SSD storage from a cloud provider, and a slow HDD
class that provisions cheaper, magnetic storage for backups or archives. This is a
sample StorageClass definition. The most important field in a StorageClass
definition is the provisioner. This tells Kubernetes which volume plugin to use
when it needs to create a Persistent Volume for this class. Every major cloud
provider has its own provisioner, like the one that we see in a screen for
Google, and there are provisioners for many other storage systems, like NFS. The
StorageClass also contains parameters that are passed to the provisioner. For a
cloud provider, this is where you would specify the disk type, like pd-standard in
this case, and whether the volume should be replicated or not. The next
important setting is the reclaim policy. It dictates what happened to the physical
storage, the Persistent Volume, and the data when the user deletes the
Persistent Volume Claim. As we saw earlier on the course, there are two main
options. Delete is the default for dynamic provisioning, and it automatically
deletes the Persistent Volume and the underlying cloud or physical storage
assets. The data is permanently lost. The other option is retain, which keeps the
Persistent Volume in a released state and the underlying storage assets intact,
preserving the data. An administrator must manually clean up the resource. There
was also a third option, recycle, which is officially deprecated nowadays. The next
parameter for the StorageClass resource is allowVolumeExpansion. When set to
true, users can increase the size of an existing PersistentVolumeClaim, and the
storage provisioner will update the Persistent Volume accordingly. And finally, we
have the volumeBindingMode. This is a crucial setting in Kubernetes
StorageClass that dictates when a Persistent Volume Claim should be bound to a
Persistent Volume and when the actual storage volume should be provisioned. It
has two possible values. Immediate, the Persistent Volume is created just after
the PVC is created. And the other option is WaitForFirstConsumer. When this
option is set, the Persistent Volume is only provisioned after a pod is scheduled
to a node. With StorageClasses, when a user wants storage, they no longer need
an admin to create the Persistent Volume first. They can simply create the
Persistent Volume Claim and in the manifest specify the StorageClass name they
want to use. Kubernetes sees the Persistent Volume Claim, looks up the
StorageClass, and invokes the correct provisioner to create a brand-new
Persistent Volume on the fly that perfectly matches the user's request. The new
Persistent Volume is then automatically bound to the Persistent Volume Claim.
This entire automated workflow is known as dynamic provisioning.
Demo: Dynamic Volume Provisioning - Immediate
Binding
In this demo, we are going to be using the default storage class to provision
a Persistent Volume as soon as the PVC is created. The first thing that we are
going to do is switch the context to the module3 context. After that, we will check
the available storage classes using the kubectl get storageclass command. We
have two storage classes, csi-hostpath-sc, and also the standard storage
class. We can see that next to the standard storage class, we have default
between parentheses. This means that if no storage class is defined in your
persistent volume, the standard storage class will be used. Note also the reclaim
policy for both storage classes, which is set to Delete, which means that as soon
as the Persistent Volume Claim is deleted, the Persistent Volume will also be
deleted. Also, the volumeBindingMode is set to Immediate, so as soon as the PVC
is created, the Persistent Volume will also be created. Let's now use the kubectl
describe storage class standard command to review the storage class
configuration. We can see that the k8s.io/minikube-hostpath is the provisioner for
this storage class. We can see also the ReclaimPolicy set to Delete and also the
VolumeBindingMode set to Immediate. Now we will try to create a Persistent
Volume. Let's review the definition. In this YAML file we are defining the my-
immediate-pvc Persistent Volume Claim and we are not specifying any storage
class name, which means that the default one will be used. Let's execute now the
kubectl apply command to create the Persistent Volume Claim. After that, we will
use the kubectl get pvc command to check the status of the new resource that
we have just created, and we can see that the status is set to Bound. And we can
also see the Persistent Volume that was created. Let's also check for other
volumes that may exist in the cluster. We will do this by executing the kubectl get
pv command. We can see that there is only one volume and it's the one that
got created when we created the Persistent Volume Claim. So the Persistent
Volume has been created automatically. It's bound to our PVC. The size also
matches the one that we set up in the PVC definition, which is 1 GB. We don't
need to create a pod or any consumer in order for the Persistent Volume to be
created because in the storage class, we are defining Immediate as
VolumeBindingMode. So this means that the storage is reserved even if it's not
used yet. So what will happen if we delete the Persistent Volume Claim? Let's
execute the kubectl delete pvc command to delete the Persistent Volume
Claim. Ideally, as the reclaim policy was set to Delete, the Persistent Volume will
no longer be there either and is no longer there, so the standard storage class is
working as expected.
Demo: Dynamic Volume Provisioning -
WaitForFirstConsumer Binding
In this demo, we are going to use a storage class with the VolumeBindingMode
set to WaitForFirstConsumer. This delays the Persistent Volume provisioning until
a pod using the Persistent Volume Claim is created. The first thing that we are
going to do is switch the context to the module3 context. Then we will need to
create a new storage class that will have the WaitForFirstConsumer binding
mode. Let's review the storage class definition. The name for the storage class is
defined in line number 5 and is set to delayed-binding-sc. The provisioner is the
minikube-hostpath and the VolumeBindingMode is set to
WaitForFirstConsumer. We are not defining the reclaim policy, so the default one
will be applied, delete. Now we will create the storage class using the kubectl
apply command. And once the storage class has been created, we will create a
Persistent Volume Claim using the new storage class. Let's review the
definition. The name of the Persistent Volume Claim is going to be my-delayed-
pvc, and in line number 7, we are defining the storageClassName. In this case,
delayed-binding-sc. Now, let's create the Persistent Volume Claim using the
kubectl apply command. After that, we will execute the kubectl get pvc. And we
see that the status of the PVC remains in Pending. This is because it's not bound
to any Persistent Volume yet, and the reason why it's not bound to any Persistent
Volume yet is because the Persistent Volume doesn't exist because the storage
class has not created it yet. Let's run the kubectl get pv to ensure that we don't
have any Persistent Volume. No resource is found, so the Persistent Volume is not
yet created. Now, to force the creation, we will create a pod that will make use of
the Persistent Volume Claim that we have just created. Let's start by reviewing
the pod definition. In this pod called delayed-pod, we are defining a volume
which uses the Persistent Volume Claim my-delayed-pvc. Let's now use the
kubectl apply command to create the pod. Now let's check the status of the pod
and also the PVC using the kubectl get command. We can see that the pod is
running and also the Persistent Volume Claim status is now set to Bound, and the
volume field also contains data. So this suggests that the Persistent Volume has
been created after we created the pod. Let's run the kubectl get pv command to
ensure that the Persistent Volume has been created. And a new Persistent
Volume has been created for our claim, and the status is set to Bound. The
Persistent Volume was created only after the pod was scheduled. This avoids
having in your cluster unused volumes, which means that you are managing your
resources more efficiently. Also, the volume is created on the node where the pod
is scheduled, which leads to better scheduling decisions. Now let's perform some
cleanup. Let's start by deleting the pod with the kubectl delete pod
command. After that, we will delete the Persistent Volume Claim, which will also
delete the Persistent Volume as the reclaim policy is set to delete. And finally, we
will delete the storage class using the kubectl delete sc command.
Exam Preparation
Exam Overview
We have learned why storage is critical in Kubernetes. We talk about the stateful
applications and the need of persistent volumes, claims, and storage classes for
dynamic provisioning. We also learned how to control the behavior of the
volumes with access modes and reclaim policies. You should now have all the
knowledge required to pass this part of the CKE exam. The most important thing
to know about the CKA exam is that it's a practical hands-on test. You won't be
answering multiple choice questions. Instead, you will be working in a live
command-line environment to solve real-world problems. The exam will be online
and remotely proctored. You will need to connect via a video call with a
proctor, identify yourself, and ensure your desk is clear. You will have 2 hours to
complete the exam directly from your browser, and there will be between 15 and
20 practical tasks that require working directly in a Kubernetes cluster. The 2
hours can be a little bit tight if you get stuck in one of the questions. To pass the
exam, you need to achieve a score of 66% or higher. During the exam, you are
allowed to have an additional browser tab open with the official Kubernetes
documentation, kubernetes.io/docsIlados and resources under the official
GitHub for Kubernetes. I'm pretty sure that you will pass the exam on your first
attempt. But to give you some more confidence, the exam registration typically
includes one free retake. Let's quickly touch on the domains and competencies
included in the CKA exam. Ten percent goes towards the storage domain, 30%
towards troubleshooting tasks, 15% for workloads and scheduling, 25% to test
your knowledge on Kubernetes architecture, installation, and configuration, and
the remaining 20% goes towards services and networking. The storage domain
account for 10% of your total score. You should expect to see 2 or 3 hands-on
tasks related to the topic that we have covered. And that includes implement the
storage classes and dynamic provisioning, configured volume types, access
modes, and reclaim policies, and manage persistent volumes and persistent
volume claims.
Demo: Recommended Exam Environment Setup
Once you get access to the exam, I would recommend doing a very basic
environment setup that will help you gain some precious seconds. The
environment uses the bash shell, so the first thing that you should do is set up an
alias for kubectl. You'll be under a lot of pressure, and spending time in typing
and misspelling kubectl is the last thing that you want to do. As soon as you
connect to the environment, run alias =kubectl, and then you will be able to run
things like k get pod -A to get the pods across all namespaces. Also, know the
short version of the resources. For example, sc for storage class. So you can do k
get sc to get the storage classes in your environment. Another example will be rs
for getting the replica set. You can check all the available short names using the
kubectl api-resources command. Notes that not all the resources have short
names, but most of the resources that you will be using in the CKE exam have
short names, so make sure that you spend some time reviewing this. The other
thing that you should do is using kubectl to generate boilerplate YAMLs for
you. Let's say that you are required to create a pod named pod1 running the
nginx image and with an emptyDir volume. So for that you will need to create a
manifest file. You can use k run pod1 and specify the image with the image flag, in
this case, nginx, and then do dry-run=clients to not create the resource and then
specify the output to be YAML. This will give you a very basic manifest file that
you can then modify to add the emptyDir volume. Another thing to do is
exporting the dry-run and output flags. So you can do export do="--dry-run=client
-o yaml." And whenever you need to create a pod, you can do k run pod2 and
specify the image, in this case, busybox $do for dry run and output yaml. This will
also generate the pod definition and avoid typos. You can also redirect the
output to pod.yaml. Then you can do the require modification with me. And after
that, you can run k apply -f and the name of the file to create the pod. The last
thing that I will recommend is preloading the Kubernetes quick reference page. It
contains a lot of commands that you will use throughout the exam. Also, before
the exam, make sure that you read the page entirely at least a couple of
times. You don't need to know things by heart, just know that they are there and
that you can use them as a reference. You are ready to start your exam. Let's look
at some example questions related to storage.
Demo: Example Exam Question 1 - Static Provisioning
Let's start with an example exam question. In this case, we need to create a
PersistentVolume named task-pv with a capacity of 200Mi. It should have an
access mode of ReadWriteOnce and a reclaim policy of Retain. It should use a
hostPath at /opt/data. And once created, we need to create a
PersistentVolumeClaim named task-pvc in the moc- exam1 namespace that also
requests 200Mi and binds to the task-pv. We are also asked to switch context, so
that's the first thing that we are going to do. After that, as we need to create a
PersistentVolume of type hostPath, I will search in the Kubernetes
documentation for hostpath persistent volume. The first result is configure a pod
to use PersistentVolume for storage. That probably has the PersistentVolume and
also the PersistentVolumeClaim. So let's open it, and if we scroll down, we will see
one of the sections for PersistentVolume. Here we have a PersistentVolume
definition with accessMode of ReadWriteOnce, and also we are specifying the
hostPath. So I will copy this and start working with it. I'm going to use vim to
create a file called pv.yaml. Then I will paste my PersistentVolume definition, and
we will start modifying it. The name of the PersistentVolume should be task-
pv. We don't need any label, so I will remove that. For the storage class, we need
the static provisioning, so I will specify an empty value. For the storage, we need
200Mi, so I will define that. For the accessMode, we need ReadWriteOnce, so we
don't need to do any changes there. And for the hostPath, we need /opt/
data. That should be all for the PersistentVolume. So I'm going to save the file and
then create the PersistentVolume with the kubectl apply -f command. And the
PersistentVolume has been created. Let's verify its status. Kubectl get pv, and we
see that the PersistentVolume has been created and the status is set to
Available. Now, let's create the PersistentVolumeClaim. If we go back to the
Kubernetes documentation and scroll down, we see that it's trying to create the
PersistentVolumeClaim as well. So I will copy it. And back to the terminal, I will
create the pvc.yaml file with vim. I will paste the content, and we will start
modifying what we need. So, the name of the PVC it should be task-pvc. We want
a static provisioning, so we shouldn't specify any storage class. For the
accessMode, it should be ReadWriteOnce. And for the storage, it should be
200Mi. This should be ready. So I'm going to save this, and then I will create it with
the kubectl apply -f command. The PersistentVolumeClaim has also been
created, so let's now make sure that it has been successfully bound to the
PersistentVolume. We will execute kubectl get pv and also pvc. And we can see
that the status of the PV is set to Bound, and we can also see the claim
associated to it. In the PersistentVolumeClaim resource, we see that the status is
set to Bound, and the volume is task-pv. We also see that the capacity is 200Mi,
and the accessMode is set to ReadWriteOnce. So this task is now complete.
Demo: Example Exam Questions 2 - Dynamic
Provisioning
Let's check another example question. In this case, we need to create a
PersistentVolume named dynamic-pvc in the mockexam2 namespace. We need
to use the cluster's default storage class, and the PVC must request 50Mi of
storage. Then we need to create a pod named data-pod that uses the
busybox latest image and mounts the PVC at the path/data. We are also asked to
switch the context, so that's the first thing that we are going to do. As we need to
create a PersistentVolumeClaim and mount it into a pod, we will look for that in
the Kubernetes documentation. Remember that in the CKE exam, they are not
testing your memory. They are testing that you know how to apply the content. So
now, let's jump into the Kubernetes docs page and search for persistent
volumes. The first result is for configuring a pod to use a PersistentVolume for
storage. So let's look at it. First is creating a PersistentVolume, which we don't
need because we want to use dynamic provisioning, and then it's defining the
PersistentVolumeClaim. This we can use and modify as per our needs. So I'm
going to copy this, and then I'm going to use vim to create the dynamic-pvc.yaml
file. I'm going to paste the content. And I'm not going to specify any storage
class because we want to use the default one. The accessMode is not specified,
so we will just leave ReadWriteOnce. And for the storage, we need to have
50Mi. We also need to change the name of the PersistentVolume to dynamic-
pvc. Then I'm going to save the file. And using the kubectl apply -f command, I
will create the PersistentVolumeClaim. Now we need to make sure that a volume
has been created for the PersistentVolumeClaim, so let's execute kubectl get pv
and also pvc. We see that the PersistentVolumeClaim has been created, and
it's already associated to a volume. The status is also Bound, and the capacity is
50Mi. So the PVC creation was successful. Now let's create the pod. Let's go back
to the Kubernetes documentation. And if we keep scrolling, we see a section for
creating the pod. I'm going to use that as a reference. So I'm going to copy it,
and then I'm going to create a file called data-pod.yaml, and I'm going to start
modifying it as per our needs. So the name of the pod is going to be data-
pod. The name of the volume is going to be test. And it's going to be associated
with the PersistentVolumeClaim that we created before, dynamic-pvc. The
container name is going to be test-container, and the image is going to be
busybox:latest. We don't need to have any pods, so I'm going to remove it. And in
the volumeMounts section, we are going to specify the mountPath to be /data,
and the name of the volume is going to be test. I'm going to save this. And then
we're going to create the pod using the kubectl apply -f data-pod command. We
will make sure that it was able to start executing the kubectl get pods. And we
see that it's not able to start. So, what is happening? Let's troubleshoot. We can
execute k describe pod, and we see that the container is starting, but it just
crashes. So this is because the busybox image doesn't do anything on its own. We
need to specify a command for the container to use when it starts. Let's open
again the pod definition. Now under container, we are going to specify the
command. In our case, it's going to be /bin/sh. And for the arguments, we will
pass the sleep command, which will make the container to sleep for 5
minutes. Save the file and then delete the pod with the kubectl delete pod data
pod. And then we're going to click created. Now, let's check that it's working as
expected, and the pod is successfully running now. So, this task is also complete.
Exam Tips
Here are my top tips for the exam. Set up an alias for kubectl and also for --dry-
run=client and -o yaml. They will save you a massive amount of time, and it helps
avoid typos. Learn and use the short name of the resource types. You want to
spend the minimum time possible typing. Always check your context. The exam
will have multiple namespaces. Before starting any task, make sure that you are
working on the correct one using the kubectl config use context command given
in the prompt. Use the official documentation during the exam, especially the
quick reference page. Don't be afraid to use it to look up the exact syntax for
a resource you are not 100% sure about. Remember that only one additional tab
is allowed. Spend some time playing with the Kubernetes docs page ahead of the
exam. Knowing how to quickly navigate and search this documentation is crucial
for success. And finally, manage your time efficiently. If you are stuck on a
question, flag it and move on. It's better to complete five easy tasks than to get
stuck on a difficult one. At the end of the day, you don't need to solve all the
tasks to pass the exam, just 66% of them. And that brings us to the end of the
course. We have covered the full spectrum of Kubernetes storage, and you are
fully prepared for the storage portion of the CKA exam. Thank you for joining me,
and good luck on your exam!